PROLOGUE

October 15, 1991
U.S. Embassy, Tallinn, Estonia
“Very snazzy, Mr. Fuller.”
“Very retro,” replied the deputy chief of mission. “Not my tie,” he
added, giving both ends of the black bow a last adjustment. “Your
‘snazzy.’” He turned around to face Ms. Boyle. “It’s a long time since
I’ve heard that one.”
“I suppose I could say you look ‘baaad.’”
Ms. Boyle, Hawkins Fuller imagined, was just on the sunny side of
forty, old enough to know “snazzy” and young enough to know
“baaad,” though for that matter, even he, at sixty-six, knew that
“baaad” meant “good.”
She lingered a moment, the way women still did in the presence of
Hawkins Fuller, imagining when the full head of silvery hair had been
black, the way the eyebrows still were, in Gregory Peck–style
contrast. But Mr. Fuller was better-looking than Gregory Peck.
He, too, lingered for a moment, prolonging the familiar comfort of
admiration. “These,” he finally said, pointing to the stack of badly
printed telexes near the edge of his desk: “Very bad. Not ‘baaad.’
Just lousy.”
“I know,” sighed Ms. Boyle, who doubted that the embassy, still
being flung together, would be getting even internal e-mail anytime

soon. “But that guy’s been working miracles with the phones. They’re
twenty times better than last week. The ambassador talked to
Brussels and Washington twice today. Clear as a bell both times.
And here,” she said, darting back out to her desk and returning with
some regular mail from the pouch. “A primitive but reliable means of
communication.” She could see that the envelopes were personal,
so she set them down unopened and left with a friendly marching
order: “Don’t dawdle. Lucy will be downstairs in five minutes.”
He wondered how many years ago Ms. Boyle would still have
been saying “Mrs. Fuller” instead of “Lucy.”
“All right,” he replied. “And if I do dawdle”—he always did; the
shambling and the daydreaming made his good looks even more
appealing—“just buzz me, Miss Blue.”
Ms. Boyle looked puzzled.
“Ah,” said Fuller. “That one you are too young for.”
She left, smiling as she closed the door, leaving Fuller to pick up
the two bright-orange envelopes atop the pile of mail she’d just
placed on his desk: Halloween cards, a little early, from the
grandchildren in Potomac. Farther down the stack, a letter from
Lucy’s Realtor in D.C., about that house in Chevy Chase she was
determined to buy.
They’d be home for good in another year, and he’d finally take up
the half-time job being held for him at the Carnegie Endowment. Odd
to find himself here, in the meantime, helping out with the New World
Order. He was supposed to have wound up his career last spring,
after the six years in Bulgaria. It had never been that much of a
career, and he’d never much minded that, but as he looked out on
the darkening Gulf of Finland, he seemed compelled to make a fast
review of it, as if it were one of the checking-for-Alzheimer’s
exercises that Lucy wanted to add to their breakfast regimen of bran
muffins and Centrum Silver tablets.

All right: the six years in Bulgaria; the four before that in D.C.; the
four years prior to those at the U.S. mission to the UN. Which put
you back in the mid- and late seventies—some luck for that to be the
era when they finally got posted to New York! And yet, for all the
fiscal calamity and crime (that awful broad-daylight hour when Lucy
came home with a bruised cheek and no purse), he’d ridden the
handbasket through some interesting stops on its way to hell. At fifty,
he’d been too old, really, for the underground pleasures that were
suddenly so unpoliced. But his looks had granted him an extension,
allowed him occasional, plausible entry to the throbbing middle-ofthe-night world west of West Street. It had been some luck, a portion
of his lifetime’s worth, to have made it home from those forays
without so much as a hangover, let alone the time-released fate that
would now be necessitating one of those humiliating obits with their
mention of a “long illness” or “pneumonia” that even Lucy, behind her
newspaper and bran muffin, could manage to decode.
But I digress, he thought, resuming the fast, reassuring rewind. He
reached the six years in Austria (Nixon mostly); then the four in
Sweden, where the draft dodgers had more social status than the
embassy people, who ran down LBJ as much as they decently could
while shaking their heads and nibbling the host’s gravlax. And before
that? The fourteen years, 1952 to ’66, right in Foggy Bottom in the
State Department’s Bureau of Congressional Relations, where he
would have been happy to stay forever, until Lucy decided that he
should use his small accumulations of clout and connectedness to
effect a shift, at the age of forty, from the civil to the foreign service. It
was time for them to see the world, she had decreed.
And that was it, a life span so well recollected, he decided, there
was no need to do the date ranges for the early sojourns in Oslo and
Paraguay, let alone Harvard and the navy and St. Paul’s. Nope, no
Alzheimer’s for Mrs. Fuller’s little boy. Tomorrow morning he’d tell
Lucy to skip the muffins and to scramble some eggs in an aluminum
skillet.

He wondered: When they got home, would there be bus service
from Maryland down to the Carnegie on Massachusetts Avenue?
During his last period at State—’81 to ’85, Reagan I, thank you very
much—he had never gotten the hang of the new Metro, whose
underground rumblings had, in any case, never been permitted to
disturb Georgetown. He was wishing that Lucy would just let them go
back there, and forget about this pile in Chevy Chase, when he
noticed the small white envelope addressed in a feminine hand with
the neatness of his wife’s generation.
One of her Wellesley pals? Maybe, though he couldn’t recall any
Russell in Scottsdale, Arizona. Only after another few seconds did
he see that the letter was for himself and not his wife. So he slit it
open—and soon heard himself saying Christ Almighty.
Dear Fuller,
Tim Laughlin died September 1 in a Catholic hospital in
Providence, Rhode Island. He was 59 and had been sick for
some time. I heard from him often—almost never saw him, but
counted him a good friend.
I don’t know whether you pray (I myself don’t), but if you do, I
know that, even now, he would appreciate your prayers.
Whatever the case, I thought you should know.
Yours sincerely,
Mary (Johnson) Russell
It had been more than thirty years since he’d talked to either one
of them, and it was easier, now, to think of her first.
She had never called him Hawkins. She’d thought it a
preposterous first name and told him so, said “the last shall be first”
and that he would be “Fuller” with her, under any and all
circumstances. He’d replied that she didn’t know the half, that
“Hawkins” was really his middle name, “Zechariah” being the first.

And they’d laughed, she with the sharp glint in her eye that
sometimes made him call her La Pasionaria, not because the glint
was passionate but because it declared, so plainly, that you, Z.
Hawkins Fuller, shall not pass. It wasn’t the castle of sex from which
Mary Johnson had barred him during their long non-affair; that had
never really been at issue. It was any sort of confidence she had
barred him from. It was her trust.
He put her letter back in its envelope, and the envelope into a
drawer, a different drawer from the one into which he’d put the
grandchildren’s cards and the Realtor’s letter.
Poor, sad, merry little Tim, he thought, looking at the clock. AIDS,
of course.
He stood up and walked into the outer office.
“You beat my summons by ten seconds,” said Ms. Boyle. “She’s
downstairs.”
And so she was. Almost as slim as she’d been at Wellesley; her
hair, now a silvery gold, in the same thick little pageboy she’d always
worn; her outfit the one she’d explained to him at breakfast. A
robin’s-egg-blue jacket over a white blouse above a black skirt: add it
up and you had the Estonians’ new, which was to say old, tricolor
flag. No one would expect the number-two man’s wife to go to this
sort of trouble, and no one would fail to notice how much prettier she
was than the number-one man’s wife.
“So,” said Lucy, smiling brightly as she brushed down a couple of
unruly stalks in her husband’s eyebrow, “Ms. Boyle tells me the mails
are coming through.”
“Yes,” said her husband. “Neither rain, nor sleet, nor geopolitical
convulsion…”

Lucy continued to smile, brushing Hawkins’ lapels and enjoying
the way two or three of the Estonian wives here in the reception hall
were noticing her spousal attentions. Perhaps they were deciding
she and Hawkins looked like that older couple in the Ralph Lauren
ads. Hadn’t a Polo shop opened up in Tallinn? Almost everything
else already seemed to have arrived.
“Your Realtor wants us to go a little higher,” said Fuller.
“Our Realtor, dearest.” She performed one last primp, pulling down
Hawkins’ right cuff. He, too, knew that she was showing off their
extended youth and vigor, as if freedom were a good brand of
moisturizer they had wisely chosen long ago. This is what you’ve
been missing for fifty years, she seemed to be saying to the
Estonians, less from patriotism than personal pride.
Fifty years? thought Fuller. More like all but twenty of the last five
hundred. Who hadn’t rolled over this place? First the Swedes; later
the Germans; only after that the Russians.
Having at last let go of her husband, Lucy now clasped both hands
of the foreign minister’s wife, exclaiming over her like a sorority sister
who’d finally made it back for a reunion. Fuller took a glass of
champagne from one of the waiters and moved away from the center
of the room.
Though guests were still arriving, the American ambassador had
already begun his toast to the embassy’s reopening, and all at once
Fuller thought he could recall a party he’d gone to maybe thirty-five
years ago, at the Estonians’ “embassy” in Washington, a sad little
outpost shared by one of the other two captive Baltic nations. A
handful of unlucky young fellows from State had been sent into a
room full of smoked fish and stained suits to keep company with the
exiles, to smile at them as if they were a girl with polio that everyone
pretended would one day, somehow, get up out of that chair and
walk again. Was it possible he’d brought Mary Johnson that night?

Then taken her home in a cab and kissed her, on the cheek, before
ten p.m.?
The ambassador was speaking of the long, unbroken “legal
continuity” of U.S.-Estonian relations, as if the crippled girl had in
some manner gone on dancing all along. But now they could all
welcome her “peaceful return to the family of nations that are free in
fact.” Applause, while Fuller mused upon how this return had very
nearly not been peaceful at all. The Lithuanians, the first to flex their
muscles after the wall came down, had driven Gorby into a real
Stalinist snit, and Tallinn was lucky to have escaped the nasty
thrashing, however futile, he’d dished out to Vilnius.
Now the ambassador tried a bit of wordplay, sparsely appreciated,
about the speed with which Estonia had gone from being a “captive”
nation to a “most-favored” one. He went on to recount the
astonishing events of the past two months: the failed coup in
Moscow; the U.S.S.R.’s panicked recognition of the Baltic nations’
independence; the UN’s offer of seats to the three of them. The
ambassador continued on, even as a murmur of bored chatter began
to rise on the periphery of his audience. Fuller felt a tug at his elbow,
from a young man eager to introduce him to a “formerly persecuted
intellectual” who was now helping to draft the constitution. And once
the ambassador officially subsided, this same avid introducer told
Fuller it was “a great imperative” that he should meet the grizzled old
man now being pulled toward him.
“Yes, of course,” said Fuller, smiling and shaking the old man’s
hand. He understood that here was one of the “forest brotherhood”
who after the war had refused to come in from the cold and accept
the Soviets’ dominion, preferring instead to remain hidden in the
woods. Not guerrillas, exactly; more, Fuller thought, like those
Japanese soldiers who would turn up on a Pacific island, decades
after the war, still hanging on to the fresh shirt they were convinced
they’d wear on the day the emperor took the Americans’ surrender.
Of course, these forest brothers had known the war was over, and

still they’d stayed out there eating bark and twigs—a mystery to
Fuller, who was pleased when the old man, looking hungry even
now, relaxed his grip.
The guest list sent over by the Estonians had been
overwhelmingly indigenous, whereas State, good sports as always,
had made sure to add a dozen or so of the old occupying Russians,
like the one Fuller was being introduced to now, a florid, white-haired
man who’d spent the last thirty years running a phosphate mine—
and five hundred people’s lives—in the northeastern part of the
country. Fuller heard “phosphate” and made a joke about the fizz in
his second glass of champagne; the Russian smiled
uncomprehendingly, until a young man from the Foreign Ministry
who’d just joined them translated the English remark—into Russian.
Fuller realized that after three decades here, this amiable
backpedaler, who had raised his glass higher than anyone else to
the ambassador’s toast, knew fewer words of Estonian than Lucy
had made it her business to acquire on the plane to Tallinn.
“Mr. Deputy Chief,” said the young Foreign Ministry man, “my
pleasure it is to present Mr. Lennart Meri.”
Fuller had been briefed on this polymath: a writer, a film director,
and now the foreign minister himself. Meri was, Fuller now assured
him, handsome enough to be in front of the camera as well as
behind.
“And look who is talking!” replied the minister. In another minute
the two of them were arranging to have lunch—“anything but you
Americans with your breakfasts!”—at the Stikliai Hotel.
A man who’d been with the more conservative wing of the Popular
Front interrupted them. An advocate, until recently, of “autonomy”
rather than full-blown independence, he was in as much of a rush as
the Russian phosphate boss to ingratiate himself with the new
reality. Fuller, displaying the same wide, whitened smile he did for

everyone else, welcomed the gentleman into the circle that was
forming around him.
“You see, Mr. Vice Ambassador,” said the Popular Front man,
more for the foreign minister’s ears than Fuller’s, “it was what you
would call a ‘neat trick’ for us to declare independence once the
Soviet parliament finally pronounced the Molotov-Ribbentrop pact
and the 1940 annexation to have been illegal all along.”
“Explain that to me,” said Fuller, in the same bright tone Lucy was
using to ask the phosphate boss’s wife how she managed to keep up
with her grandchildren in Moscow.
“It was easier for them to admit that we had never been part of the
U.S.S.R. than to let us secede,” said the man from the Popular
Front, making sure his explanation registered with the foreign
minister. “That,” he elaborated, “would have created a bad
precedent. One that many other of the Soviet republics might still be
wanting to use.”
“Nothing succeeds like secession,” said Fuller.
The foreign minister smiled, but the Popular Front man, not getting
the jest, began to fret that he had scored no points after all. Fuller
gave him a friendly tap on the arm and thought: The Jesuits. That’s
what Tim would be saying, with his strong, high laugh about the logic
that had just been offered. The Jesuits would love that, Hawk!
To Fuller’s relief, the musical program was about to begin, peppy
alternations of Cole Porter and Baltic folk songs that Ms. Boyle had
helped to pull together. She was at it even now, setting out the
enameled-eagle party favors they’d been unable to find all afternoon.
After twenty minutes and a fast vodka tonic, and while the Russian
phosphate boss applauded the conclusion of “Friendship”—just a
perfect blendship!—Fuller left the room. He knew that Lucy would
cover for him.

In half a minute he was out on the cobblestones, stepping off into
the night, happy with the autonomy—if not exactly independence—
that he’d always taken as his right. Lucy might make him drive her to
see the sights in Narva next week, and come June she’d have a
houseful of dull friends over from the States to see the White Nights;
but however late he came home tonight, it would be all right. She
lived, he knew, in a perpetual White Night of her own, pushing the
clock back to whatever hour she decided he had come in at after all.
It was really too cold to be out, and Fuller was still wary of walking
here at all. Hard to imagine there were no longer Soviet troops on
patrol. Actually, there were still some, not due to leave for a year or
two more, by which time the Estonians would also have gotten rid of
the rubles they were using even now. Awfully good-looking, some of
those Russian boys he’d seen. Sweet faces, trying to look so hard
under their stiff caps. Alas, how quickly those faces aged and
sagged, the way it was with every good-looking Jewish boy he’d ever
had back home.
Fuller looked up toward a small, pearl-onioned dome, not far from
a stone staircase connecting the city’s old and upper towns. A strong
wind was blowing across the gulf, maybe all the way from Finland,
that country so like himself, for so long half free and quite
comfortable, somehow exempt from the fuss of near-apocalypse.
A young man was passing in the opposite direction. A student,
Fuller supposed: slightly built, hands in big overcoat pockets, puffing
a cigarette. Suggestive of another era; one imagined a book of
censored poems inside the overcoat. Fuller looked back over his
shoulder and, sure enough, found the young man doing the same.
But Fuller’s smile unnerved the boy, who soon continued on, eyes
front, toward his destination.
Fuller was drunk enough that he might have nodded, tried his luck.
But he’d realized, even before the young man averted his gaze, that
all he himself wanted right now was to look at the small receding

silhouette and imagine that it belonged to someone else, another
boy, whose memory was proving persistent tonight, like that last
Porter tune, which even here, in the darkness, he couldn’t quite
dislodge from his head.
He wondered what time it was in Scottsdale, and whether the
embassy’s new phones were as good as Ms. Boyle said.

PART ONE

SEPTEMBER–DECEMBER 1953
In the era of security clearances to be an
Irish Catholic became prima facie
evidence of loyalty. Harvard men were to
be checked; Fordham men would do the
checking.
—DANIEL PATRICK MOYNIHAN

CHAPTER ONE

September 28, 1953
Tim counted four big fans whirring atop their stanchions in the
newsroom. Every window here on the seventh floor was open, and
summer had officially departed six days ago, but that was
Washington for you. When air-conditioning might come to the Star
seemed to be a perennial matter of sad-sack speculation among the
staff: “When hell freezes over,” went one answer Tim had heard in
his three months here. “Because then we won’t need it.”
Miss McGrory, one of the paper’s book reviewers, arrived with a
bottle of whiskey, which she set down next to the punch bowl and
cake, whose single chocolate layer and frosted inscription, “Happy
Trails, Sheriff,” would soon be cut into by the retirement party’s guest
of honor, Mr. Yost, a pressman who’d been at the Star since 1912
and took his nickname from a weekend job he had as a constable
over in Berwyn Heights.
More people drifted in. “We could use a piano,” opined Miss
Eversman, the music critic. She’d covered Liberace’s concert two
nights ago at Constitution Hall and was telling a police reporter that
the pianist’s mother had been in the president’s box with one of
Liberace’s brothers, Rudy, who’d served in Korea.
“So she’s got one boy who’s a soldier?” asked the reporter.
“Maybe she’s got hope of grandchildren after all.”
Miss Eversman laughed.
“Forget Liberace,” said Mr. Yost, who’d started to reminisce about
his first years here at the paper. “I remember seeing Wilson himself
—that’s Woodrow Wilson, not Charlie, to you youngsters—up in his

box at Keith’s Theatre. You wouldn’t have figured it from an egghead
like him, but did that man ever love his vaudeville. You could sell him
any player-piano roll the minute it came out.”
“We really do need a piano,” Miss Eversman sighed, as the
national and managing editors walked in. Mr. Corn and Mr. Noyes
took up positions off to the side of things and remarked to each
other, a bit shamefacedly, on the smallness of the spread.
“Well,” said Mr. Corn, quoting the late Senator Taft’s famously
impolitic advice about higher food prices: “Eat less.”
The party was making Tim feel nostalgic, and thus a bit foolish,
since he’d been, after all, only a summer hire allowed to stay on
through September—or, more exactly, this coming Friday afternoon.
They’d put him in the city room, even though he’d never been to
Washington before June and knew nothing about the District as a
place where many citizens lived life quite oblivious to the federal
government. His placement, he’d come to understand, was typical of
the Star, a paper both venerable and feckless, produced each
evening by an eccentric, occasionally brilliant staff. He had liked it
here and would miss the place, but given the shortness of his tenure
he wasn’t sure he should even take a piece of the cake once it got
cut.
A small stack of the paper’s early edition lay atop an open drawer
of the file cabinet he was leaning against. Ambassador Bohlen was
flying home from Moscow to talk with Secretary Dulles, and this
morning Louis Budenz, a Fordham professor and former red, had
testified to the McCarthy committee that, in his “humble opinion,”
parts of an Army-commissioned pamphlet about Siberia—something
put together to educate the Far Eastern Command—contained large
chunks of Soviet-sympathizing stuff that had been taken, without
footnotes or refutation, from Communist writers.

Cecil Holland, the reporter who’d written the Budenz story, now
saw Tim reading it and asked, “Laughlin, you just graduated from
Fordham, didn’t you? Ever study with this guy who says the army’s
been indoctrinating itself?”
Tim smiled. “I had somebody else for Economics, Mr. Holland.” He
grimaced. “I think I got a C-plus.” Holland laughed and walked over
to claim a piece of the cake that had finally been sliced.
At Fordham, Tim had mostly studied American history and English
literature, and his plan in coming to Washington remained, even
now, to combine his major and minor into a job writing for a politician,
though throughout the city’s hot, depopulated summer he’d made
little headway finding anything on Capitol Hill. Well, he’d have plenty
of time and motivation come Friday afternoon!
The party conversation had turned to Senator McCarthy’s
imminent wedding. “What kind of guy picks lunch hour on Tuesday to
get married in a church?” asked the financial-page editor.
“A guy who’s busy taking over the world,” answered Cecil Holland.
“That’s why he’s marrying a girl on his staff,” added the police
reporter. “Maximum efficiency. She’ll be able to crank out the press
release for Joe’s firstborn as soon as she’s cranked out the baby.”
“Well, from what I hear,” said Miss Eversman, “McCarthy’s mother
might be more surprised by all this than Liberace’s.” Everyone had
heard the rumors.
Would the president show up for the wedding? People began to
take bets. Ike’s contempt for McCarthy was by now well developed,
but it would be hard, some argued, for him not to put in an
appearance, now that he was back from vacation, and with St.
Matthew’s being only a few blocks from the White House.

Miss McGrory, who appeared to regard this talk of McCarthy on
the order of a frog in the punch bowl, returned to an earlier subject
and insisted that they didn’t need a piano. She patted Mr. Yost’s arm
and dared him to get everybody started singing “Oh, You Beautiful
Doll”—Woodrow Wilson’s absolute all-time favorite, the retiring
pressman had reminded them.
Tim, who had been to all the West Side weddings of his
uncountable cousins, right away felt Irish instinct trump shyness. He
joined in as soon as Mr. Yost and Miss McGrory got things going,
and within a moment, even as he remained alone with his thoughts,
was singing the same words as everyone else:

Let me put my arms about you,
I don’t want to live without you.

His job at the Star had come through the nephew of an old pal of
his dad’s from Manhattan Criminal Court, where Paul Laughlin had
worked during what everyone in the family now called the old days—
the ones before Mr. Laughlin, nearing forty, put himself through
LaSalle, by correspondence and then at night, completing his
transformation from process server into accountant, making possible
his family’s move from Hell’s Kitchen to the unimaginably big and
bright new rooms of Stuyvesant Town. Those rooms seemed even
larger now that Tim’s older sister, Frances, the Laughlins’ only other
child, had gone off to Staten Island to live with her husband.

If you ever leave me, how my heart would ache,
I want to hug you but I fear you’d break—

While singing these lines, Tim realized that most of the partygoers’
eyes were on him. His pleasing tenor voice—a surprise to those
who’d heard only his soft, polite speech with its occasional stammer
—had risen above everyone else’s in volume, though to anybody
paying attention to the lyric, it seemed far more likely that any
hugging to involve this five-foot-seven, 130-pound young man would
result in his breakage, not the girl’s. Realizing what had provoked the
attention and smiles, Tim blushed and lowered his voice, while
everybody else raised theirs for the song’s big finish:

Oh, oh, oh, oh,
Oh, you beautiful doll!
Mr. Yost led the revelers’ applause for themselves, and when it
subsided, Mr. Brogan, Tim’s boss on the city desk, announced: “It’s
clear to me that we kept too much of Laughlin’s light under a bushel
this summer. I wish we’d had more for you to do, Timmy.”
Tim smiled and thanked him. Since June he’d mostly typed and
done rewrites, bringing the perfect grammar of the nuns to the fitfully
produced copy of the oldest city reporters, who teased him about
being a college man, and about a pretty girl named Helen, another
summer hire who answered a phone in Classifieds and sometimes
stopped to chat at his desk.
They might have kept on teasing him now, but they didn’t really
know enough about this conscientious, if cheerful, boy, and so the
spotlight soon moved elsewhere. Tim shrank back into himself as

Cecil Holland redirected the conversation to—what else?—the
senator from Wisconsin.
What would McCarthy do next? people wanted to know. Holland
advised them to watch what was going on up in New York: Cohn had
been running subcommittee meetings there, taking testimony in
closed sessions when he wasn’t snooping around Fort Monmouth
over in Jersey. You watch: McCarthy would soon be taking shots at
the army for whatever security breaches he could discover or invent.
“I’m gonna love you, like nobody’s loved you, come Cohn or come
Schine,” crooned the police reporter, reprising a song spoof from last
spring, when McCarthy staffers Roy Cohn and David Schine,
colleagues and pals (some people said more), had gone on their tour
of USIA libraries in Europe, ridding the shelves of anti-American
books by American authors.
No one ever talked half so much about Eisenhower as they did
about McCarthy, Tim reflected; the senator was as constantly on
people’s lips as FDR had been when he was a boy, even if the only
other thing Roosevelt and McCarthy might have in common was the
admiration of Tim’s father. Paul Laughlin still revered FDR (Mrs. R
was now another story), as he had since the First Hundred Days.
Before the arrival of the New Deal, already the father of two babies,
Mr. Laughlin had spent plenty of afternoons playing stickball on the
pavements of the West Fifties, unable to scare up any work pushing
dress racks or plastering or even delivering groceries to widows in
their Ninth Avenue walkups. But by the end of ’33, Paul Laughlin had
become, according to the family joke, “the oldest man in the CCC,”
upstate for weeks at a time, cutting down trees or planting new ones
for what was at least half a living wage. Some kindhearted
supervisor took notice of his hard work and referred him to a pal in
the courts, where he worked his way up toward something like
security and, at last, the cessation of sleepless nights.

Nothing—not even Grandma Gaffney’s cutlery-tapping recaps of
every Father Coughlin broadcast—had ever put Mr. Laughlin off
Roosevelt. He remained true to the president’s memory even when
the war ended and the accounting money started coming in and he
began bringing the Journal-American instead of the Post home to
Stuy Town, which he eventually took to reminding them had been
built by a private insurance company, not as a government project.
By the time Tim was finishing high school, he’d gotten used to
hearing his father say that Bishop Sheen—fine anti-red that he might
be—nonetheless had a foolish sympathy for some of the labor
unions. And a couple of years after that, once the television came
into the living room, Dean Acheson could not come on it without Mr.
Laughlin announcing, in sarcastic imitation: “I will not turn my back
on Alger Hiss.” The line always made Tim and Frances laugh, as if
Acheson were not a person but a corporation with a trademark
pledge, like “Lucky Strike Means Fine Tobacco.”
But for all that, Tim saw no reason why his father—the mildest of
Cold Warriors, really, looking eastward not so much for invading
Soviets as for the house he now hoped to buy in Nassau County—
wasn’t right about the fundamentals of politics.
Mr. Brogan, Tim now noticed, had been buttonholed by Betty
Beale, one of the society reporters.
“Miss Canby isn’t pulling her weight?” asked Brogan, laughing.
“You shock me, Miss Beale.”
“Joke if you want,” said the reporter, to whom the women’s-page
editor was a constant thorn in the side. Miss Beale took her own
work seriously and made a point of actually going to the events she
covered, not just relying on a phone call to the hostess to ask what
cabinet wife had “poured” for which white-gloved ladies in
attendance. “I cannot do this wedding alone,” she now told Mr.
Brogan. “We need more than one piece out of it—something for
tomorrow’s edition, something for the next day, and something for my

weekend column. You know, Mr. Brogan, tonight McCarthy and his
fiancée are having a buffet supper at some friend’s farm out in
Maryland, and thanks to Miss Canby there will be no one present
from the Star.”
The city editor continued listening as Miss Beale thrust home. “It’s
McCarthy, Mr. Brogan. It may be just a wedding, but surely this spills
into your bailiwick—and even Mr. Corn’s. May I please get a little
help?”
Brogan looked around thoughtfully, until he spotted Tim, still
standing against the filing cabinet. “How about making use of this
fine fellow, Miss Beale? He can spell, he’s got a few Hibernian
freckles, and he can even sing. Surely he can get the goods on an
Irish wedding.”
“How about it, cookie?” Miss Beale asked Tim. “Do you think you
can get the names of the people in as many pews as possible? And
get as many quotes as they’re willing to sling along with the rice?
The reception’s at the Washington Club right afterward. You can go
to that, too.”

Tim moved away from the filing cabinet and said sure. It was the
only word he’d ever spoken to the still youthful but formidable Miss
Beale.
“Good, then,” said Brogan, having settled the matter.
“Better than good,” said Cecil Holland, who’d overheard the
exchange. “If Laughlin ever gets hauled in and investigated for
anything, he can always say, ‘But, Joe, I was at your wedding, for
God’s sake!’”
The bottle Miss McGrory had brought in was by now pretty well
drained, and a sizable body of those in attendance were thinking

about adjourning to the Old Ebbitt Grill over on F Street. Tim’s
momentary celebrity earned him an invitation to join the group, but
he decided he’d be better off boning up for this opportunity he’d just
been given, however late in the game it had come. And so within ten
minutes he was on his way home with someone’s copy of the
Congressional Directory, the deluxe edition with photographs. He
could study the pictures tonight and increase the percentage of
guests he’d recognize.
Passing the Old Post Office on the other side of Pennsylvania
Avenue, he was reminded that he’d yet to mail home the letter he’d
been carrying around for the past two days. In it he made his job
prospects sound a lot rosier than they actually were—but then again,
who knew? Maybe this assignment was a portent of better things
that might be coming once he left the paper and got back to passing
out his résumé, this time in earnest, on Capitol Hill.
Should he go up to Hecht’s and get a new white shirt? The collar
was frayed on the only laundered one he had left. No, too expensive,
he decided; he would settle for getting his shoes shined at Union
Station tonight. Walking along Fifth Street, above Indiana and D, he
continued on his career-conscious train of thought, contemplating
the signs for lawyers and bondsmen, knowing that the former
profession was still too much to aspire to, even if the latter one, like
process-serving, now resided in a realm his father had lifted the
Laughlins permanently above.
He bought a pint of milk and a sandwich before reaching his room
on the Hill, in the two-hundred block of Pennsylvania, one flight
above a hardware store. His occupancy was illegal, the lower floors
of the building being zoned only for offices, but a landlady with no
vacancies a couple of blocks away had tipped him off to the nice
Italian owner here, who told him he could have the room cheap and
not to worry. It came with a hot plate and tiny icebox, and a hall
shower one flight up, where apartments were legal.

Tim always made sure to keep the radio low; he clicked it on now
and waited for the tubes to warm up while he poured his glass of
milk. A promo for One Man’s Family became audible as he sat down
and began to drink.
The job ads from Sunday’s paper were on the table, and for a few
minutes he gave them a second, mostly hopeless, look. The
“Situations Wanted” had a hierarchy as discernible as the legal
pecking order on Fifth Street.
YOUNG MAN, COLORED, desires evening or night work of any

kind. Phone LI 8-5198.
After three months down here, the “colored” had ceased to shock; it
was the “work of any kind” that now arrested his attention and made
him wonder how many weeks might be left before he’d have to
consider putting that phrase into an ad of his own.
YOUNG MAN, college education, desires a responsible position.

Call WO 6-8202.

Pretty vague, to say the least, but except for the telephone, which he
didn’t have, it pretty much matched his own circumstances. He
certainly couldn’t compete with the ad just above it:
YOUNG MAN, 27, B.A., Yale, 3 years experience legislative

research. 3 yrs. formal legal training, desires position with trade
assoc. or law office. Box 61-V. Star.

He wondered if Helen had taken any of these down over the
phone.
Setting the paper aside in favor of the Congressional Directory, he
decided to put a ruler over the names beneath the pictures. He
would see if he could correctly distinguish, say, Prescott Bush (RConnecticut) from Bourke Hickenlooper (R-Iowa). At least he was
familiar with his assignment’s location, having gone to St. Matthew’s
last month on the Feast of the Assumption.
He wished he’d done more sightseeing this summer, or just spent
a little less time in this room. He had gone to wait outside St. John’s
Church one Sunday morning in June, hoping to catch a glimpse of
Eisenhower, but a disappointed tourist had told him that Ike was out
of town. Everyone waiting by the church had had to settle for
watching a small group demonstrate against the Rosenbergs’
execution. There had also been an evening, back in July, when the
second-string theater critic had comped him to a production of Major
Barbara. They’d gone to see it together, and afterward the man had
bought him a drink at the Hotel Washington’s rooftop bar, then
walked him all the way home and given him a funny little hug, which
he somehow hadn’t minded, even though the man was old enough
to be his father and didn’t really live, as he’d claimed, on Capitol Hill.
Excited about tomorrow, but a little restless after half an hour with
the Directory, Tim thought he’d like to go out to a movie, but he’d
been to see The Robe just last night, a quasi-religious act he’d used,
pretty Jesuitically, as an excuse not to go to church this morning. He
realized now that Miss Beale hadn’t told him whether Senator
McCarthy’s wedding would be just a short ceremony or a whole
Mass. If it was the latter, he’d have a legitimate excuse to sleep a
little later tomorrow instead of starting his day at the seven o’clock
inside St. Peter’s on Second Street. Actually, he’d better go to St.
Pete’s either way. Even if it did turn out to be a Mass at St.
Matthew’s, he’d be too busy taking notes to line up for the
Communion rail.

CHAPTER TWO

September 28, 1953
“Ready?” asked Hawkins Fuller, as soon as Mary Johnson entered
his office.
“Ready,” she replied, noting the gray-striped pants as he swung
his feet off his desk. “But aren’t you overdoing things?” Sporting a
version of the foreign service’s traditional trousers seemed ridiculous
here in the State Department’s boxy modern building in Foggy
Bottom.
Fuller was unpersuaded. “It’s true that we’re civil servants, Miss
Johnson, but our FSOs are supposed to wear gray-striped trousers
for daylight calls. The reception to which we’re heading constitutes a
diplomatic assignment. It is now six-twenty; the reception begins at
six-thirty; and sunset is not until six-fifty-five.” He flashed his smile,
put on his hat, and offered her his arm. “Just paying tribute to
custom.”
Out on Twenty-first Street, while they waited for a taxi, Mary
reflected that on an actual foreign service officer the overcorrect
pants would appear a clumsy attempt to get ahead. On Fuller they
provided an opportunity to slow his own advance, to stay where he
was through the prankish means of going by somebody else’s book.
A man in the Bureau of Far Eastern Affairs who’d known him when
they were boys at St. Paul’s had told Mary the other day: “Hawk
could have been a real track star, but for the small matter that he
could never see the point in outrunning anybody. Pretty odd for a
sixteen-year-old.”

Fuller held the cab door while she scooped up the edge of the skirt
she’d shortened on her Singer last night.
“That new?” he asked.
“It’s so old it was once New Look, which in case you didn’t know is
as dead as the New Deal. I miss both.”
“Really?” was all Fuller replied.
Mary knew that she wouldn’t have to elaborate on her feelings
about FDR. She had never met a man, here at the job or elsewhere,
more indifferent to politics than Hawkins Fuller. As for the New Look,
she wasn’t going to tell him she missed its long skirts because her
legs were too skinny.
The driver, looking toward the orange glow over the Potomac, had
begun to thrum his fingers on the steering wheel. “Where exactly are
we going?” asked Fuller.
“Twenty-six twenty-two Sixteenth Street,” said Mary, giving the
address of the Lithuanian legation.
“I don’t suppose it has a sign,” said Fuller.
“I’m not even sure it has a telephone.”
The driver pulled away.
“Well,” said Fuller, “you’re a sport to be my girl for the night. I’ll
take you to dinner after we sample whatever funny food they’re
serving.”
Poor plump Miss Lightfoot, who had the desk next to Mary’s, had
been mad with envy when she’d heard about the invitation. Women
in the building, including the married ones, generally went straight to
the department’s Biographic Register after their first sight of Hawkins

Fuller. She’d done it herself, finding out that he’d been born in ’25 to
a businessman father (also St. Paul’s); had performed some minor
naval heroics at the end of the war; then finished Harvard in ’50, just
after his twenty-fifth birthday. Before coming to the department he’d
spent one year working for a branch of his father’s firm in Asunción
and another on a Fulbright in Oslo.
Now he served with Mary in the department’s Bureau of
Congressional Relations. Their boss, Thruston Morton, an
internationally minded Republican who’d once been in Congress
himself, wanted Fuller at tonight’s reception to help convince a
particular congressman on HUAC that State really was serious about
the captive Baltic republics and that a more aggressive approach
could be expected from the still-new administration.
Mary liked Fuller, but experience and instinct left her immune to
the swoonings of Miss Lightfoot and the rest of the distaff staff.
Growing up in New Orleans, she’d seen any number of men, a few
almost as handsome as he, making their solitary excursions into
special precincts of the Quarter. She couldn’t say she’d been
surprised to learn from the Biographic Register that Fuller had
arrived in Washington without a Norwegian wife.
She felt pretty sure he had done some checking on her, too. Fuller
probably knew that she had, more or less, a boyfriend, and that this
romance of hers with a doctor at Columbia Women’s was, for Fuller’s
own purposes, at just the right state of intensity: not so hot that Mary
couldn’t accept someone else’s invitation; not so cold that she’d be
expecting a second date with Hawkins Fuller.
“Nice-enough house,” he said, as the taxi reached the legation.
“But not exactly the Pan-American Union building.” Tomorrow night
Secretary Dulles would be giving a dinner there for the Panamanian
president—a tougher ticket than one to this party being held by the
Estonian government-in-exile, an institution so small it had had to
borrow the Lithuanian exiles’ premises.

Mr. Johannes Kaiv, consul general at the outpost the Estonians
were able to maintain in Rockefeller Center, greeted Mary and Fuller
at the door. An assistant named Miss Horm ushered them into a
parlor, pointing, as she led the Americans through a hallway, to the
portrait of “our President Rei,” presumably hung this afternoon and
on its way back to Rockefeller Center tomorrow morning. “He was
first elected to that office in 1928,” Miss Horm told the guests, with a
bittersweet smile. Fuller interrupted her recitation of all the posts Rei
had held before and since to ask, “Is he here?”
“Oh, no,” answered Miss Horm. “He is in Sweden.”
“A disappointment,” said Fuller.
“Do not believe the reports of his death,” said Miss Horm, in a
lower voice. “These rumors are spread all the time.”
“I’m confused,” Fuller whispered to Mary, once Miss Horm took
leave of them. “Didn’t the Swedes once conquer the Estonians? Are
they now buddies?”
“Sorry, I never took the foreign service exam, either. In three years
I’ve gone from being a secretary in the Passport Office to being more
or less a secretary to the assistant to the Assistant Secretary for
Congressional Relations.” She had been in this new post, a few feet
from Fuller’s own office, for three weeks. “It hasn’t been a meteoric
rise.”
Fuller looked to see if the complaint was serious, and her smile
told him that it wasn’t. Mary had come to Washington once she
graduated from Sophie Newcomb and her daddy, an honest lawyer
on Poydras Street who’d kept his head down during all of Huey
Long, got a congressman friend to get her the job. With her striking
thinness and very black hair she still looked more like the sort of
coed who went to Paris than the kind who became a government
girl.

The little cocktail crowd surrounding her and Fuller consisted, she
soon understood, of a few exiles and a good many more highachieving Estonian-Americans. The department, for all she knew,
had an acronym for the latter, HAEAs. A series of quick introductions
revealed the ones here to include a Maryland state legislator and a
national officer of the VFW.
Fuller had found a seat on a couch and was now tugging at her
navy-blue skirt, urging her to join him.
“We’re supposed to circulate,” she replied.
“Take a load off, Miss Johnson.” He tugged a little harder, until she
sat down. He was already bored, she could see, but confident—as
he had no doubt been his whole life—that people would be coming
to him, wherever he sat. Yes, the reluctant track star: Why run the
race when you’ve already won it?
And come people did, like the wife of a Standard Oil man, who told
Fuller and Mary that the plundered oil shale of Estonia was now
helping to run the Soviet army occupying that little country. The
woman was glad to be here, “showing the flag” with her husband,
who believed in “keeping his hand in.” However unlikely the Baltics’
liberation might be, “you have to have faith,” she told Fuller.
“There’s an optimist,” he said to Mary, once the woman was gone.
“I’m guessing there’s more Esso than Estonian in the husband’s
veins.”
“Well, it is faith of a kind,” Mary countered, less inspired by the
woman’s display of it than she was wearied by Fuller’s insouciance.
“Would you be as mocking if the faith at issue were the religious
kind? The kind Dulles worries we’re losing?”
“I would never mock John Foster Dulles,” said Fuller. “My father’s
colleague on the board of the American Bank Note Company?”

Mary sighed. He hadn’t, of course, answered the question, which
had been about the secretary’s sense that faith was losing its power
to motivate America in the world. Declining to press the point, she
settled for saying: “I miss Acheson.”
“Are you always so awash in nostalgia, Miss Johnson? The New
Deal? Long skirts? Retired cabinet secretaries?”
“I’ve got nothing much against the current one. But I do sometimes
feel like part of the typing pool inside a big Presbyterian parsonage.
With Acheson you knew you were working for a diplomat.” On his
last day, eight months ago, she had joined the long line of
employees walking through the chief’s office to shake his courtly
hand: Thank you for your good wishes, my dear young lady.
“Never met the man,” said Fuller. “At least this time only the boss’
brother has a mustache.” Acheson’s had been a bit reddish. Allen
Dulles—who ran the CIA while his sibling, Foster, ran State—had a
more or less white one. “I can’t imagine growing one myself,” Fuller
continued. “Or would you like me to, Miss Johnson? Do you desire
my advancement?”
“No,” Mary answered. “All I want is that you save me from this.” A
burly man of about forty, carrying two fish-topped crackers, was
moving toward her at considerable speed. An honest-to-God
Estonian, she surmised. Before Fuller could act, however, the
gentleman introduced himself as Fred Bell, born on the Lower East
Side to immigrant parents, but completely American himself, down to
his changed name. A veteran of D-Day who now owned three shoe
factories in Massachusetts. Even so, he was part of an exiles’
committee, and nothing in the world could have made him miss the
opportunity to come down here and say something about the
situation.
“Miss Horm back there told me you were with the State
Department, ma’am. Fifty thousand deportations since the takeover.

Including my cousin, just a peasant, who these days has to work on
a Russian collective. My other cousin over there’s a musician. The
oboe. He gets to stay in Tallinn and play bad music.”
“Why did they deport the peasant?” Mary asked, feeling foolish
using the word.
“Because the peasants resist collectivization. Estonians are
natural businessmen, ma’am. Very independent. You know, my
relatives used to vote. Now they’re impoverished and relocated, or
just gone.” In his anxiety to make the most of the few moments he
imagined he was having in the presence of officialdom, Mr. Bell ate
both of the hors d’oeuvres he had carried across the room. His eyes,
Mary noticed, were watering. “We’re a colony. Stripped of our
machinery, forced to feed them with our crops. Did you know you
used to be able to get eggs from Estonia in New York City? So good
they were exported all that way! What we need is a general strike,
something that with a little encouragement from abroad might spread
to the railway workers in Russia. If they went out, there’s no telling
how soon the whole system might collapse!”
Mary looked at him, apologetically. Despite the supposedly tough
new policy that had dispatched her and Fuller to this party, they were
still required, she knew, to speak the department’s soothing
Esperanto of noncommittal clucks and nods. She found herself
urging Mr. Bell to contact the Office of Eastern European Affairs with
his views—but then she couldn’t remember the name of the
Assistant Secretary for that particular bureau.
She turned to her companion, who’d been busy talking to a retired
languages professor. Fuller saw, and misinterpreted, her desire for
assistance.
“You’re right,” he said, rising. “We’ve got to go. Don’t know how I
lost track of the time. Tere!” he said to Mr. Bell, giving him his card
and propelling Mary toward the door.

“See what I learned?” he asked. “It means ‘Pleased to meet you.’”
“Actually, what I wanted—”
“I suppose ‘Next year in Tallinn’ would have been better, but for
just a few minutes’ work with the languages prof, ‘tere’ isn’t so bad.”
Mary turned around and saw Mr. Bell, half ancient mariner and half
modern PR man, already importuning someone else.
“Let’s get out of here,” said Fuller. “There’s no sign of
Congressman HUAC, in any case.”
“We can’t decently leave yet.”
But Mary saw that they couldn’t accomplish anything, either. A few
minutes later—so soon after sunset that Fuller’s trousers remained
almost appropriate—the two of them were back out on Sixteenth
Street. He put his arm around her waist as they began walking
south. “What are you in the mood for?”
“Scrambled eggs, by my lonesome, at home.” Mary could only
imagine what Miss Lightfoot would say to her turning down dinner
with Hawkins Fuller.
“Well, there’s something to be said for an early night,” he
observed.
“Do you have them?” she asked. “Early nights?”
“Tonight I will,” he answered. “I’m having lunch tomorrow at the
Harvard Club with my mother’s childless brother. Have to look sharp.
I need to stay in his good graces.”
Mary looked at him, but for a moment said nothing further.
“The pants are one thing,” he declared. “But you don’t think I
bought these shoes on my salary, do you? Or that I want his winter

place in New Mexico to go to one of my sisters?”
“How about other nights? Early or late?”
Fuller just smiled, and clasped her waist a little tighter. “What do
you put on your eggs, Miss Johnson? Ketchup?”
He was not, she knew, doubling back to attempt a forward pass;
he had no intention of pursuing an invitation to her place, though she
now recalled the almost pro forma advance he’d made in the
cafeteria two weeks ago, on her third day in Congressional
Relations. He’d been pleased, she thought, when it was blocked.
Had she said yes, he would probably have followed through, happily
enough—all the way from third base to home if she’d let him—but
she had allowed him, she felt sure, to return to more ardent matters
elsewhere.
“Cayenne pepper” was all she replied.
Fuller pretended to wince. “Ah, of course. New Orleans. All right,
spitfire. Let me find you a taxi.” Cabs would be thin on the ground
until they reached New Hampshire Avenue. “Too bad we can’t
share,” said Fuller. “But not all of us can live on the Georgetown
reaches of P Street. What are you, maybe two blocks from your old
friend Acheson?”
Mary, who still probably received more money from her father than
Fuller got from his uncle, said, “So I’m not the only one who reads
the Biographic Register.”
“Knowledge is power,” said Fuller. “Then you know I have a
modest one-bedroom on I Street. Just blocks from the office, really.
Makes the boss think I can’t bear being too far away from my work.”
And makes it easier, thought Mary, for you to arrive, after a late
night, in a rumpled rush—as you often do, putting Miss Lightfoot into
an even deeper swoon. She felt her attitude toward Fuller becoming,

for a moment, almost sisterly. “Do you know,” she asked, as they
kept searching for a cab, “that McLeod is supposed to start doing
interviews in our own little precinct before New Year’s?” Scott
McLeod, the new administration’s security man, with his
“Miscellaneous M Unit,” was hunting through the ranks for moral
turpitude of any kind, but one kind in particular, the kind that still got
the men of the foreign service mocked as “cookie-pushers” whose
striped pants might as well be aprons.
She had tried to ask the question as if it were merely a piece of
office gossip, some water-cooler topic on the order of McCarthy’s
wedding.
“I came in as a certified paragon, Miss Johnson. Letters of
recommendation from Cordell Hull and both Dulleses. Never let it be
said that the Fuller family doesn’t touch all bases.”
She should respond, of course, that she hadn’t been talking about
him, only the morale of the division; but before she could get that
falsehood out, he had flagged down a cab. “You take it,” he said with
a grin. “I’ll get the next one.” He opened the door and made sure her
skirt didn’t get caught. “There. Much easier, I’m sure, than when you
were taking the New Look to such lengths. I’ll see you tomorrow,
Miss Johnson.”
She waved, and watched him pass up another available cab. He
continued along Sixteenth Street, toward downtown, instead of
turning onto New Hampshire, which would have taken him to his
apartment.

CHAPTER THREE

September 29, 1953
“Our Holy Father cordially imparts to Joseph R. McCarthy and Jean
Kerr on the occasion of their marriage his paternal apostolic
blessing.”
When the priest finished reading the pope’s official good wishes to
Senator McCarthy and his bride—a pièce de résistance with which to
end the ceremony—the crowd’s appreciative murmur turned into
applause. A second later, the organist struck the first note of the
recessional and the congregation snapped to its feet for the newly
married couple’s walk back up the aisle.
Joe and Jean—as even Timothy Laughlin couldn’t help but think of
them at this moment—turned from facing the huge mosaics behind
the altar and began their march to the cathedral’s doors. Standing
near the back of the church, Tim would have to settle for imagining
the McCarthys’ smiles until they were much farther along in their exit.
In the meantime he gazed at the huge red-and-white marble pillars
that seemed to be running with blood, and put a quarter into the
poorbox: he’d taken the extra coin from his dresser when he left this
morning, forgetting that, even if there was a full Mass with the
wedding, there wouldn’t be a collection.
He had just counted the twenty-four windows in the cathedral’s
dome, recording the figure in his Palmer-method hand on a page of
his steno pad that included the following notes:
Mrs. Nixon next to Dulles (Allen, CIA not State)
Jack Dempsey! (TELL DAD)

Wilbur Johnson—family friend (Kerrs), brought bride to church
Roy Cohen—McC committee counsel, one of ushers
As soon as the bride and groom were out the door, Tim managed
to leave the cathedral by a side exit, ahead of most of the crowd. On
the church steps he was supposed to pass his notes to Miss Beale’s
assistant. The wedding itself would make it into this afternoon’s
paper, but coverage of the reception would have to wait until
tomorrow’s. He wouldn’t need to deliver his notes on that part of
things until the end of work today.
Finding a place on the steps behind several reporters, Tim tried on
the feeling of being one of them. It was a bad fit, several sizes too
big. All the newsmen seemed full of knowingness, and none of them
was giving his dislike of McCarthy a day off. Eisenhower’s absence
—the president had claimed a conflict with the Panamanian leader’s
visit—was the subject of a few satisfied jokes before the reporters
quieted down to get a quote from Nixon, who was pausing briefly
during his descent of the church steps.
“A beautiful ceremony,” said the vice president, slowly enough for
any pencils still competing with microphones. “The bride was lovely,
but then I’ve never met a bride who wasn’t!” He snapped off a grin
and quickly escorted Mrs. Nixon to the car.
“Did he just insult Joe’s wife?” wondered a man from the Baltimore
Sun. There was, Tim thought, something a little off about Nixon’s
effortful remark, part of the awkwardness you could feel all over the
cathedral steps. “Kiss her, Joe!” the folks on the sidewalk kept
shouting. But the senator wouldn’t comply, and his expression
continued to undergo the oddest alternations. For ten seconds at a
time he’d look like one of Tim’s Irish uncles, the smile ready to issue
a song, but then some saturnine cloud would scud across the eyes
and mouth, turning McCarthy into a baleful, preoccupied spectator at
his own nuptials.

“He looks like he’s ready to push some cookies himself,” said one
of the reporters, pointing to the gray-striped pants beneath
McCarthy’s morning coat.
“Did you know that Torquemada got her to convert for this?” his
colleague asked. “The girl was a Presbyterian.”
Tim scanned the faces in the crowd filling up a whole block of
Rhode Island Avenue. Most of them were women, and the mood
was cheerful, but here and there he could spot someone glaring up
at the groom, displaying a resentment either abstract or deeply
particular. These angry exceptions only added to the off-kilter feel of
the whole event.
Once he’d handed off his notes, Tim hotfooted it two blocks to the
Washington Club in Dupont Circle, where guests waiting to be let
into the reception were sweltering alongside another crowd of
gawkers. Twenty minutes passed before he could get inside this
grand old building to make notes on the white chrysanthemums and
blocks of orange ice in the bowl of nonalcoholic punch. He got as
close as he could to the receiving line. If he were more aggressive,
let alone taller, he might have secured a better vantage point, but
even at some distance he could pick up most of what the politicians
were saying in their overloud voices. Senator Hickenlooper was
there—he recognized him from the Congressional Directory—along
with Teddy Roosevelt’s daughter, Mrs. Longworth, and a
Congressman Bentley from Michigan, identified with the help of a
Detroit News reporter. Between jottings Tim got further glimpses of
McCarthy himself, who he suspected (from long observation of his
male relatives) had just managed to get hold of something more
fortifying than the punch. But the drink had not resolved the
alternations in his facial expression; it was speeding them up.
“Had to settle for wearing this!” cried Joseph P. Kennedy, tugging
at the lapels of his dark business suit. “My own cutaway’s not back
from the cleaners.” This was understood, to general laughter, as a

reference to his son Jack’s wedding, less than three weeks ago, to
Miss Bouvier, the Times-Herald’s inquiring photographer. There
might be no sign of Senator Kennedy here this morning, but three of
his brothers and sisters were right behind the old ambassador.
Tim kept at it until 2:05, through the bride’s vigorous toss of her
bouquet—“That gal can play on my team anytime!” someone roared
—and the newlyweds’ departure in a black limousine, not the red
Cadillac rumored to be a wedding present from some of the
senator’s Texas supporters. Back out in Dupont Circle Tim soon felt
himself sweating through his blue suit. His steno pad was already
soaked from his own palm; thank God, at least, for ballpoint pens.
Looking at the top page of his notes, he realized he would soon be
mystified by his own abbreviations unless he made a fair copy, with
amplifications, right away. So once he’d bought a half-pint of milk at
the big Peoples drugstore, he sat down amidst the late lunchers and
sun-catchers on a bench near the Circle’s western rim. Across the
expanse of grass he could hear the last of the wedding guests
laughing through their departures.
He had just finished transcribing the first page on the pad when he
noticed a shadow approaching: someone also wanting to sit down.
As quickly as he could, he cleared off his milk carton, napkin, and
two loose steno pages from the rest of the bench. “Sorry,” he said,
before he’d even had a chance to look up.
“For what?”
For everything, thought Tim, once he raised his head and saw the
spectacular young man standing over him. Taking in the suit jacket
slung over the man’s broad shoulders and the faint glistening of
sweat in the hollow of his neck where he’d loosened his tie, Tim
wanted to say: For being nothing like you. For being all you’ll have
for company on this bench.
“May I?” said the man.

“Of course,” Tim finally answered.
“Don’t they give you an office?”
Tim laughed. “They’re not even giving me a job past Friday.” And
then it all came out in a nervous, mortifying rush: his graduation from
Fordham; his arrival here in June; his summer of rewrites on the
Star’s city desk; his hope for a job on Capitol Hill; the chance to
cover McCarthy’s wedding.
Realizing that the man’s suit was as fine as his physique, Tim
asked: “You weren’t a guest there, were you?”
It was the most foolish question he could have posed; if this man
had been inside the Washington Club, or even the cathedral, Tim
would certainly have noticed.
“No,” said the man, pointing in the direction of New Hampshire
Avenue. “I was having lunch with my uncle at the Harvard Club.”
Tim nodded.
“So who was there from the State Department?” the man asked.
“Come on: name names, as the groom might say.”
Tim flipped through the pages of his pad, as cooperatively as if
he’d actually been asked to do this in the witness chair. Searching
for a relevant name, he mocked his own parochial-school
penmanship, feeling certain his companion must have an altogether
more manly scrawl. “‘The neat handwriting of the illiterate,’” he said,
nervously quoting 1984. “Here we go. Mrs. Dulles. And Mrs. Walter
Bedell Smith, the undersecretary’s wife. The Spanish ambassador?
That doesn’t count. Harold Stassen? Foreign operations
administrator for the president? Not actually the State Department, I
guess. Is that where you work?”

“Yes. The job also brings me to the Hill every week or two. But I’m
not due there today until three-thirty. By the way,” he said, taking
Tim’s pad and flipping back to something he’d noticed on the first
page, “there’s no ‘e’ in Roy Cohn.”
“Live and learn,” said Tim, who obediently made a correction.
“Thanks.”
“Come on. We can walk a bit and pick up the streetcar on
Pennsylvania. It’ll get us both where we’re going.”
Tim started gathering his things so quickly that the young man had
to tell him, “Finish your milk. We’ve got time.”
Taking two last pulls on his paper straw, Tim looked at the paragon
beside him and hoped he wouldn’t now tighten his tie.
“Okay, we’re off,” said the man, once Tim had trotted the waxed
milk container to a trash basket. Only when he fell into step with the
handsome stranger did he notice that the bench to the right of the
one they’d shared had been empty all along.
Walking across the Circle to Connecticut Avenue, no more than
ten minutes into their acquaintance, the much taller man said: “And
to think you used to be so talkative.”
Thrilled at being teased, Tim replied, laughing: “I do talk too
much.”
“No, you don’t,” said the young man, giving Tim’s neck a
momentary, affectionate squeeze. The touch rendered him mute,
perhaps the only person in the United States who couldn’t find one
more thing to say about Joe McCarthy.
The man walking beside him broke the silence: “May I ask you a
personal question?”

“Sure.”
“Is this milk-drinking a habit of yours?”
“Sort of. I think they were always hoping it would make me taller. I
didn’t rise to the full five-feet-seven you see before you until I was
seventeen. I guess I developed a taste for it.”
The man nodded. “Glasses?”
“Two or three a day. Small ones.”
“No, idiot. How long ago did you get those?” He tapped the right
arm of the boy’s spectacles.
“Oh!” said Tim. “Had ’em since time immemorial. I must have been
eight. Farsighted. I can read a street sign a block away, but I’ve got a
problem with print or even faces close up.” With his eyeglasses in
place, he could see the man’s expression quite clearly, but couldn’t
be sure what it indicated. A trace of pity? A flicker of real interest in
what he’d been telling him? Anxious when his companion said
nothing more, he went nattering on. “They’re not so bad, really. I
used to have those old steel-wire frames. Got these tortoiseshells
going into my junior year of college. Pretty snazzy, no?” Looking up
into the man’s blue-gray eyes, Tim felt sure that they had never worn
corrective lenses. His own glasses suddenly felt like an artificial limb.
They reached the corner with the streetcar stop.
The man tenderly removed Tim’s eyeglasses. “How many
fingers?” he asked, holding up three just an inch from Tim’s eyes.
“Three,” said Tim, just able to make them out.
“There. You’re healed,” said the man, folding the eyeglasses and
slipping them into the handkerchief pocket of Tim’s jacket.

“You’re a riot,” said Tim, smiling as his heart pounded. He
retrieved the glasses and put them back on and saw that the man
was looking at him with a gaze that could only be called appraising.
He wanted to give this god a playful shove, and thought he could
probably get away with making it look like only that, rather than his
desperate desire to touch this person whose name he didn’t even
know.
The streetcar stopped in front of them.
“I’m Timothy Laughlin, by the way.”
“I’m pleased to meet you, Timothy Laughlin.”
Tim had time enough to see that the man was pleased, but then
the doors of the streetcar opened and the most terrible thing
imaginable happened. As the two of them boarded, three other
people, two women and a child, got between them. Standing in the
aisle of the crowded car as it went down Pennsylvania, struggling to
see past those three other souls, Tim only briefly recaptured his
acquaintance’s attention. The young man gave him a helpless shrug
and a relaxed smile that seemed to say: Oh well, sorry about this
little turn of fate.
Tim got off—there was nothing else to do—when the car stopped
in front of the Star. He waved goodbye from the sidewalk, unsure
whether the man could even see him. Standing in the doorway of the
newspaper’s office, he watched the streetcar continue on its
eastward way, and he knew that if he lived to be a hundred, he
would never be more in love than he was now.

CHAPTER FOUR

October 6, 1953
The handful of observers at the back of Room 357 could see the
shoulders of the witness stiffen. Mr. Edward J. Lyons, Jr.,
representing the Judge Advocate General, gamely proceeded to
describe the frequency with which United Nations prisoners had
been “discovered with their hands tied behind their backs and their
eyes gouged out. They’d been used for bayonet practice and the
like.”
While still in charge in Korea, General MacArthur had been
determined to do things differently from the way they’d been done
during World War II. Rather than waiting for victory—or, as it
appeared to be turning out this time, negotiated stalemate—he’d
begun investigating North Korean atrocities as soon as anyone got
wind of them. The evidence of torture and brainwashing was plentiful
and compelling, and Senator Charles Potter (R-Michigan) appeared
to relish running this hearing that had been convened to discuss it.
McCarthy had not finished honeymooning down in Nassau, but the
atrocities task force of the Permanent Subcommittee on
Investigations was Potter’s responsibility, and he seemed
determined to make the most of it. There were no cameras or
reporters here at this closed executive session in the Senate Office
Building, and public hearings on the subject wouldn’t come until
December, but even so, Potter remained energetic—no matter that
the Democrats, who’d months ago quit the committee in protest of
McCarthy’s tactics, refused to come back even for this; no matter, in
fact, that Potter was the only senator, amidst several staff members,
to have shown up this morning. He still looked bent on getting to the
bottom of something awful.

For most of the grim testimony it was hard to remember that this
was the McCarthy committee. But there came a point, in the midst of
eliciting information from Lieutenant Colonel J. W. Whitehorne III,
when Potter made the mistake of thinking out loud: “I am curious
about the twenty-three Americans who are still over there, whom
apparently Communist propaganda got the best of. Or maybe they
went into the service as pro-Communists. Is there any check being
made as to the background of the men still there?”
Once Colonel Whitehorne declared that information on the
defectors was indeed available, Roy Cohn, as if hearing a whistle,
sprang from a midmorning slumber: “What was the answer on that?
Did any of those people have Communist backgrounds?”
“Some of them had leftist leanings,” said Colonel Whitehorne.
“Would we be able to get some documentation?” asked Cohn,
more in the imperative than the interrogative. All at once he was in
possession of the hearing, which now seemed, more familiarly, to be
concerning itself with domestic subversion.
Tim Laughlin had a much better view of Cohn than he had had at
McCarthy’s wedding last week. He wasn’t sure whether to take him
for a mobster or a boy wearing his first suit. The dark, hooded eyes;
the scar down the nose; the slicked-down hair—all these features
fought against the committee counsel’s improbable, extreme youth.
Twenty-six, Cecil Holland, back at the Star, had said.
Tim could see the concern that Cohn’s line of questioning had
provoked on the high, creased forehead of the army’s new counsel,
John Adams. But Tim was looking more closely at Potter, to whom
he might actually be talking once the hearing reached its conclusion.
Yesterday afternoon he’d called the senator’s office to confirm his
appointment and been told by the secretary that he might like to get
a glimpse of Potter in action before coming in for an interview.

With his horn-rim glasses and balding brow, he reminded Tim of
the lay teachers in math and science at St. Agnes’ Boys’ High. He
would have been surprised by Potter’s own youth if he hadn’t looked
him up in the Congressional Directory during his last afternoon at the
Star. Only thirty-six, and already in the upper body after three terms
in the House! In addition to his regular committee assignments, the
senator served on the Battle Monuments Commission, a fact that
somehow appealed to Tim, who last night had imagined getting the
job and making phone calls that would spruce up the cannon at Bull
Run or the statue of Father Duffy in Times Square.
But the crisp zeal Potter was again showing, now that Cohn had
subsided, had to do with far-more-distant battlefields that had barely
cooled. None of the POWs who’d been rescued or exchanged—in a
mental condition more frightening than their physical one—was
seated here this morning. Only the brass were at the witness table,
and it was painful enough hearing the descriptions of torture filtered
through them. Tim could only guess what the impact would be when
the victims themselves testified in a couple of months. Cecil Holland
had told him how McCarthy liked to perform a sleight of hand
between the committee’s executive and public sessions. When pink
witnesses who’d been subpoenaed to reveal their former Communist
ties showed any instinct to fight back during the closed session, they
most likely wouldn’t get called for the open hearing, where McCarthy
preferred to display the timid and guilty-looking. Things would
operate with a strange similarity in this case, Tim imagined. The
more shaky the repatriated prisoners, the more powerful Senator
Potter’s point would be.
All this activity felt reassuring to Tim. Whatever the committee’s
reported excesses, surely not even Miss McGrory, back at the Star,
could object to this particular inquiry. Only three days ago the pope
himself had called for new international laws against war crimes, and
two years before that, Tim had heard Father Beane, the visiting
priest from the Chinese missions, tell about what he and his brothers
had suffered at the hands of Mao’s advancing armies. Even now he

remembered the friar’s cadences and fervor, and how he himself had
sat in the Church of the Epiphany, between Frances and his mother,
thinking: Some “soldier of God” I am! That was, after all, what he
was supposed to have become on the spring Sunday in 1944 when
Bishop O’Neill confirmed him with a symbolic toughening slap to the
face.
But maybe here, in the smallest of ways, he could be helpful in the
fight against godlessness and cruelty. If he went to work for Potter,
he would not just be keeping Father Duffy laureled; he’d be affording
protection to Father Beane as well. It might be the only soldiering he
ever did. He’d never been able to think through what he’d do when
the draft board got around to calling him up. Do you have
homosexual tendencies? Check yes or no. When he’d registered,
almost four years ago in that little office up at Fordham, he’d realized
he was damned either way he answered: he could be an outcast or a
liar. He’d chosen to lie, rationalizing that “tendencies” could be
proved only by experience, and he’d certainly had none of that.
Homosexual tendencies: had Uncle Alan, his mother’s never-married
brother, kept them tucked away with his St. Christopher medal,
inside the backpack he’d carried onto Corregidor? Tim had often
wondered.
Potter was making ready to adjourn, telling the military men that
he’d be out on the West Coast later this month, doing some more
preliminary interviews. While he was away, he expected them to
keep getting ready for the open hearings in December. “We’re
working toward the same purpose,” he said, with midwestern nasality
and a smile. His gavel came down at 11:45 a.m.
Everywhere in the city one could feel that autumn—the season not
of death, Tim always thought, but of quickening—had finally arrived.
What Drew Pearson still called the “Washington Merry-Go-Round”
had, after a summer idling in the weeds, rattled to life, even without
McCarthy in town to flip the switch. Yesterday Governor Warren had

been sworn in as Chief Justice, while Nixon was embarking on a tenweek tour of Asia.
Potter stood up, with a wincing, unexpected slowness, and came
out from behind the committee dais. How large his head seemed in
proportion to the rest of his body, Tim thought, before noticing what
was seriously wrong. An aide had handed the senator two canes.
From the stiffness of his gait, Tim realized that the man was walking
on artificial legs—not the sort of fact that went into the tabular pages
of the Congressional Directory.
And yet, all at once this fact seemed more joking than somber.
Each cane had a little electric flashlight near its top, and Potter was
now playfully using one of them to signal a man three seats away
from Tim.
That man—small and gray and grudgingly groomed, with a thin
face somewhere between mottled and ravaged—returned Potter’s
smile. He then got up to leave the back row, nodding genially to Tim.
“Excuse me,” said Tim, before the man could depart, “do you know
where Room 80 is? I tried to locate it on my way here. I’ve got an
appointment there in—”
“That’s number 80 in the Capitol, son. Not here in the SOB. In fact,
Charlie’s the only s.o.b. not housed with the other ninety-five s.o.b.s
here in the SOB.”
“I have a job interview with him. With Senator Potter, I mean.”
“Well, come with me, young sir. I’m heading there now.”
They trotted down the stairs to the subway that ran between the
two buildings. The older man explained how the senator had his
office in the Capitol to make his handicap less of an inconvenience.
“Of course it’s not so damned convenient when the committee
meeting is here instead of there, but it helps more often than not.”

Tim could smell a peppermint on the man’s breath and wondered if
it was there to mask a morning shot of Four Roses. He could easily
imagine the two of them saying hello on Ninth Avenue, the older man
having emerged from McNaughton’s saloon to slap him on the back
with best wishes “for that fine woman, your Grandma Gaffney,” who
would decline the wishes with a lace-curtain shudder once Timmy
brought them to her kitchen.
The man ushered him to a wicker seat on the jammed little
subway. Tim could see Potter in the car ahead as the two-car train
started down the monorail. While it moved, the man continued
talking in a rat-a-tat-tat like Winchell’s. “It was a land mine that did it,”
he explained. “January 31, 1945, Battle of the Bulge, in the Colmar
Pocket. No choice but to amputate both his pins. Spent a year in
Walter Reed and had to learn to walk all over again. Fella who’d
once been a high jumper!”
Tim nodded gravely in the darkness.
“The VA calls him ‘permanently and totally disabled’!” cried the
man, cackling over the clatter. “Well, it doesn’t keep him from voting
on their budget.”
“What are the lights on the canes for?” asked Tim.
“Hailing cabs.” The man paused for a moment. “Well, we’ll soon
see how ‘abled’ Charlie turns out to be among this crowd he’s in with
now.” He pointed to one of the heads in the lead car. “See our boy
Roy up there?”
“Yes,” said Tim. They had reached the end of the Lilliputian tunnel,
and he could make out the back of Cohn’s freshly cropped skull.
“Don’t use the men’s toilet when he’s around, if you catch my drift.
Though he tends to be enchanted by fellows a little huskier than
yourself.” The man laughed as the train bucked to a stop.

“Are you on Senator Potter’s staff?” asked Tim.
“No,” the man answered, chuckling, as he and Tim made their way
to the Capitol’s first floor. “Let’s just say I’m authorized to help him
out a bit from time to time. Him and some of the other Michigan GOP
men. My name’s McIntyre, Thomas McIntyre. Call me Tommy. Was a
newspaperman for several eternities, down here and up in Detroit.”
Tim shook hands and introduced himself, trying to understand
what this slight, fast-moving man meant by helping the senator out,
and wondering who had authorized him to do it.
“Potter’s a good-enough egg,” said McIntyre, the heels of his
unshined shoes beating a fast rhythm across the marble corridor.
“He’s managed to vote for foreign aid but not forget it’s the
automakers who sent him here. You know,” he continued, almost
reflective, “he ought to be an interesting fellow. He was actually a
social worker before he went off to the war. But he’s got one
handicap worse than no legs.”
“Really?” asked Tim, as McIntyre knocked on the door of Room
80.
“Yeah. A permanent charley horse between his ears!”
McIntyre was still laughing when the door to the senator’s office
was opened—by a man with one arm.
“His driver,” whispered Tommy. “No foolin’!”
Miss Antoinette Cook, the woman Tim had spoken with on the
phone, introduced him to Robert L. Jones, a still-young man who
looked as if he might be Potter’s executive assistant, and whose
speech carried the salt of a Maine accent. “Oh, yes, Mr. Laughlin,”
he said, appearing less than pleased by Tim’s arrival, let alone
McIntyre’s. “The fellow that Hawkins Fuller recommended when he
was up here to defend State’s latest excessive appropriation.”

McIntyre looked at Tim with an encouraging smile, and then alarm.
“Jesus, kid, your face has gone white. It’s only a job interview. This
ain’t the Depression.”
Hawkins Fuller.
Tim managed to nod and shake Mr. Jones’s hand, while McIntyre
cheerfully took charge of the situation. “Put him to work, Jones. See
what he can do. Better yet, see if he can do the bit of work I was
going to do for you today. Here, son, this is a copy of what
Knowland’s planning to say on the floor a couple of hours from now. I
got it from his press man. It’s no different from what he said at his
press conference yesterday, but it’s a couple of decibels higher, and
it’s going to make a splash. So why don’t you sit down at one of the
Underwoods here and write a couple of paragraphs that Charlie can
say in support of it?”
Mr. Jones had already lost interest in Timothy Laughlin; he was on
a phone behind Miss Cook, cupping his hand over the receiver.
“Go on, read it, read it,” said Tommy McIntyre, as he wheeled a
typist’s chair into position behind Tim.
Senator Knowland, the majority leader, had come home from his
world tour the other day and learned of Adlai Stevenson’s call for a
nonaggression pact with the Russians—a proposal that had irritated
the California senator to an extreme degree. “Now watch the
Koreans drag out the Panmunjom talks,” he was warning. “This will
be one more sign that we need to put our house in order and our
rifles at the ready. Time is not on the side of the Free World, and we
don’t need Mr. Stevenson, after his massive repudiation at the polls,
recommending that we play at useless diplomacy.”
Tim had only a slight idea of how Potter spoke, but he was pretty
sure the point of this writing assignment was to make him sound as
implacable as Knowland. So he took up a yellow pad and made
several notes for a few paragraphs of oratory. To begin with,

Knowland must be extolled. To continue, Stevenson must be
excoriated, for his attempt “not only to bend over backwards, but to
roll out the red carpet for our adversaries of that same color.” The
prose began to flow almost automatically. The defeated Democrat
was proposing “a nonaggression pact with a flagrant aggressor.” To
conclude, one needed to take a shot at India, a sentimental favorite
of liberals, which Knowland had accused of backing the North
Korean position before the peace talks had even gotten underway.
“In my great automobile-making state,” wrote Tim as Potter, “we’re
wary of any car or country that stays in ‘neutral’ for too long. ‘Neutral’
is what you’re in when you roll downhill.”
After penciling in a few revisions, Tim rolled a sheet of paper into
the Underwood and typed up this stentorian boilerplate. Struck by his
own speed, he realized how the words—for all that he believed
them, and he more or less did—seemed to be coming from neither
Potter’s brain nor his own. He was speaking in another voice entirely
—the way, as an altar boy during Mass, he would be saying his Latin
part while still hearing the English words of whatever hymn had
soared through the church a few minutes before. He proofread the
little speech a second time, to make sure he hadn’t typed the words
“Hawkins Fuller” somewhere in the middle of one of its sentences.
Then he handed the page to Mr. McIntyre.
“Fast fella, aren’t you?” the lined little man said with a grin, before
carrying the speech to the suite’s innermost office. Before five
minutes passed, he reemerged, in the company of Senator Potter
and a third man. All of them, carrying their hats, headed toward Tim.
“Another Irish wordsmith!” enthused the senator, who put both his
canes in his left hand, so that his right could extend itself to Tim.
“Welcome to the staff, Mr. Laughlin.”
Tim shook Potter’s hand and realized with embarrassment that he
had been looking down at the senator’s feet.

Potter seemed pleased by the
awkwardness he encountered daily.

chance

to

alleviate

an

“I was just telling Mr. Jeffreys, my Lansing constituent here, that
I’m looking forward to some duck hunting on the Upper Peninsula
this winter. These days I’m able to glide around in some paper-thin
galoshes my wife gave me, while my pals have to clomp and sweat
in boots that weigh a ton. ‘Aren’t your feet cold?’ one of them asked
me last year. ‘Not exactly!’ I told him. ‘Unless they’re feeling chilly
wherever I left ’em in France!’” He paused to laugh. “Everything’s got
its advantages.”
Tim smiled, more in awe than humor. Potter clapped him on the
shoulder and continued on out with McIntyre and Mr. Jeffreys. Miss
Cook then presented him with two forms to be filled out. “You can
bring these back with you when you start Monday morning, Mr.
Laughlin.”
Tim thanked her and everybody else still in the office. A minute or
so later, halfway down the Capitol’s east steps, he paused to sit
beside a huge stone pediment supporting an ornate lamppost. He
closed his eyes and shook off the image of Potter’s severed feet, lost
somewhere in the soil of France. It wasn’t hard to banish the picture;
his mind had no room for it, or even for the fact that he could now
pay the rent and write home with some good news. His mind was
filled with the afternoon of McCarthy’s wedding, exactly a week ago.
An hour after getting off the streetcar, he’d been summoned to a
telephone on the other side of the city room. “A call from Capitol Hill,”
he’d been told. Through the receiver had come the voice he’d heard
an hour before and never expected to hear again: “Send your
résumé and a letter of application to the attention of Miss Antoinette
Cook. The job is a junior assistant with writing duties.”
Dumbfounded, Tim had written down the address and phone
number for Potter’s office. “Thank you,” he’d managed to say.

“If you get the job, treat yourself to a glass of chocolate milk.”
And with that the still-nameless voice had left the line.
Hawkins Fuller.
Now, a week later, Tim sat for another moment on the steps,
before he opened his eyes to see a flag being run up one of the
distant poles on the Capitol’s roof. It was a familiar sight: he knew
that this flag would wave for only a moment before being lowered
and shipped to some elementary school in Cheyenne or Mill Valley,
where the teachers could tell the students it had flown over the U.S.
Capitol. But for the few seconds it was aloft, filled with what might be
two new separate futures, Tim looked at it with his hand over his
heart.

October 6, 1953
Dear Rep. Fish:
You may assure your Dutch-American constituent in
Wappingers Falls that the Department of State views all recent
violence in Indonesia with the greatest possible concern. As
Secretary Dulles remarked on…
Mary Johnson proofread her letter to the New York congressman
and sank into the feeling of futility that often overcame her by
midafternoon. What could any of these well-meant epistolary
stitchings and swabbings really do to treat the wounds of the tortured
world? There was news this week that Lockheed had begun work on
a nuclear-powered airplane; no doubt it would be carrying an atomic
bomb as well.
Behind Mary, Miss Lightfoot was speaking to Beverly Phillips
about the woman in the Office of Legal Advisors who’d just won a

four-thousand-dollar car in WMAL’s “Mystery Voice” contest.
“Well,” said Mrs. Phillips, “she won’t have any trouble making her
Community Chest contribution.”
Mary laughed. Underneath the correspondence piling up for the
bureau chief’s signature lay her copy of the memo from R. W. Scott
McLeod, security officer to 1,142 employees, informing all of them
that if they chose not to make a Community Chest contribution this
year, they must report to his office for an interview. Secretary Dulles
was chairman of the department’s drive, and McLeod’s zeal to show
the boss what a little extra aggression could accomplish had sparked
much grumbling about the “Conformity Chest.”
“There’s nothing wrong with what McLeod is doing,” said Miss
Lightfoot, in her near-chronic tone of irritation. “He’s just trying for
one-hundred-percent participation. He’ll lend you a dollar if you can’t
contribute one on your own.”
Mary turned her small swivel chair so that she and Beverly Phillips
could each raise an eyebrow to the other. Miss Lightfoot also found
nothing wrong with McLeod’s unceasing security-risk investigations.
Indeed, she seemed disappointed with the estimate that his review
of things wouldn’t reach Congressional Relations until December.
A young man carrying a book now came through the door,
confusing Mary, who took him for the summer office boy from
Eastern European Affairs. Hadn’t he returned to school?
“Is Mr. Fuller in?” the boy asked. He stammered over the “F” in
Fuller. “I couldn’t find him on the wall directory, but the man at the
front desk told me to come here.”
Mary smiled. She realized that this wasn’t the boy from EEA,
though he did look a little like the lovesick Donald O’Connor in Call
Me Madam, the only musical anyone would ever care to make about
this place. And then it occurred to her. This skinny fellow was

lovesick. She looked at him gently, filling up with annoyance toward
Fuller as she did so. What new recklessness of his had made this
boy venture here with a handful of pebbles to throw at Romeo’s
window?
“I’m afraid he left early. To go to the Georgetown library, I believe.”
“The library at George Washington U.,” Miss Lightfoot corrected.
“Thank you,” said Mary. Her colleague, already matronly though
no more than thirty-five, certainly kept track of Fuller.
“Will he be back?” the young man asked.
“I doubt it,” said Mary.
Managing not to stammer, the boy said, “I was bringing him this.”
He handed Mary a new biography of the elder Henry Cabot Lodge. A
receipt from Trover’s bookshop stuck out of it. An odd present to
bring here, thought Mary, Lodge not exactly having been an
internationalist. But it was a big and serious book—impressive, the
boy had probably reasoned—and he had spent six dollars on it.
“You could leave it here,” she said. “I’ll see that Mr. Fuller gets it.”
The boy still looked crestfallen.
“You can leave a note, too,” Mary added. “So he’ll be sure to know
who it’s from.”
“I’ll write one inside the book,” the young man declared, looking
more hopeful.
Mary pointed to the empty chair at the side of her desk and
watched him fumble for his ballpoint pen. His handwriting was so
neat she could read it upside down without the least effort.

With thanks to Hawkins Fuller
(I got the job. You’re wonderful.)
Timothy Laughlin
“Does he know where to reach you?” asked Mary, trying to sound
casual instead of confidential. “Is there a number you’d like to
leave?”
“I’m not on the phone,” said Timothy Laughlin. A cloud rushed over
the map of Ireland that was his face—mortification, Mary thought, at
having used such a tenement archaism. “But I’ll put my address with
it,” he added, recovering enough equilibrium to accept the index card
that Mary gave him to write it on. He also removed the bookshop
receipt, and asked if she could direct him back to the Twenty-first
Street entrance.
After he’d gone, she prepared the envelope for another soothing
letter, to Congressman Ikard of Texas. Adjusting her typewriter’s left
margin, she noticed Miss Lightfoot smoothing her strawberry-blond
permanent wave, and realized what close attention the woman had
paid to the boy’s visit.

CHAPTER FIVE

October 16, 1953
Senator Kennedy, the radio was saying, had today called for “the
development of a strategic air force with sufficient retaliatory powers
to threaten a potential aggressor with havoc and ruin.” However
strong his words, they could not compete with McCarthy’s
announcement, just made in New York—and deemed worthy of a
bulletin—that one of his Fort Monmouth witnesses had broken down
crying and admitted he’d been lying to the committee. According to
the announcer, the senator had rushed out of the hearing in the
Federal Building, spoken to reporters, and then rushed back in to get
what the witness promised would now be the truth.
After a full week in Senator Potter’s suite of offices, Tim had grown
used to the radio’s steady murmur. The Fort Monmouth hearings
were making so much news—lab secrets said to be going to East
Germany; the alleged spies’ links to the now-dead Julius Rosenberg
—that you would think they were open to the public, whereas in fact
all the news they made came straight from McCarthy himself,
whenever he decided to hit the microphones outside the committee
room’s closed door. The senator seemed determined to justify the
urgency with which he’d interrupted his honeymoon last Sunday,
even though he was right now the only senator up in New York at the
executive sessions. Several staffers—including Mr. Jones, for
Senator Potter—were up there, too.
Still not sure what Jones’s exact position was, Tim felt it probably
didn’t matter much. In practical terms, the office’s secretary, Miss
Cook, a single woman who lived at the Hotel Continental, was the
person who kept everyone, Potter included, hopping. She’d directed
Tim to answer constituent mail this morning, and right now had him

writing a speech on fishing-industry issues that the senator would
deliver the next time he was home. Tim had just looked up “sea
lamprey” in the encyclopedia.
The staff were encouraged to go into the galleries and listen to the
floor debates as often as they liked. The Potter legend—what
Tommy McIntyre called “the gimp log-cabin lore”—included the story
of how, while learning to walk all over again at Walter Reed, Potter
would ask to go to the House and Senate in order to observe the
doings of those two august institutions in which he would later serve.
There was little enough action on the floor this week; debate had
been replaced by high-pressure caucusing behind the scenes. Since
the Democratic mayor of Cleveland had been named to fill the late
Senator Taft’s seat, it wasn’t entirely clear which party controlled the
show. At this moment there were forty-eight Democrats and fortyseven Republicans, but between Senator Morse (an Independent
pledged to organize with the GOP) and Vice President Nixon, who
could break a tie, Ike’s party might be able to hang on, just barely, to
its committee chairmanships and agenda. “Our fellas better get
some exercise and lay off the spuds,” Tommy had declared while
breezing through the office a couple of days ago. “One bad heart
attack and we’ll all be ordering new stationery.”
Tim now took care not to let any crumbs from Mrs. Potter’s sugar
cookies fall onto the draft of the speech. Everyone agreed that the
senator’s wife, who often baked for the staff in the kitchen of the
Potters’ ninety-dollar-a-month Arlington apartment, was a
warmhearted, if flighty, woman. Lorraine Potter’s particular part in the
legend of limblessness involved her supposedly having sprung bolt
upright in bed, back in Cheboygan in ’45, at the exact moment Potter
stepped on the land mine in France. Her own legs, she swore, had
gone numb for several minutes.
So far nothing Tim had worked on came close in importance to the
paragraph of remarks he’d auditioned with, and which, so far as he

could tell, Potter had never actually delivered. The little speech now
sat in a file with Stevenson’s original call for a nonaggression pact,
along with Knowland’s subsequent attack and reactions from several
other figures. Winston Churchill himself had announced that he saw
nothing terribly wrong with the idea—perhaps, Tim thought, a
backhanded way of suggesting its irrelevance.
“The scourge of Adlai!” cried Tommy McIntyre, suddenly passing
through the room with a cackle and a snort. The interruption made
Tim happy. He hadn’t talked to anyone for an hour and a half.
“I bring you tidings from the New York Federal Building,” Tommy
said.
“You mean the witness who broke down crying?”
“No,” said Tommy, smiling even wider. “Somewhat older tidings,”
he said, slapping an inch-thick typescript onto Tim’s desk. “Last
Thursday’s transcript. Turn to where it’s dog-eared, Mr. Laughlin.”

MR. COHN: Have you been told about any of the charges against

Mr. Yamins?
MR. CORWIN (witness): No, sir, I haven’t.
MR. COHN: Was he pretty friendly with Mr. Coleman?
MR. CORWIN (witness): Well, I would say they were friendly. I

don’t think they had much social contact.
MR. JONES: Friendly in what respect, then?
MR. CORWIN (witness): Well, they worked together, and it was a

companionship.

MR. JONES: Scientific companionship more than a social

companionship?
MR. CORWIN (witness): I would say so, yes, sir.
MR. SCHINE: Mr. Corwin, you lived with Mr. Coleman, didn’t you?

Tim looked up, worried where this transcribed colloquy (“it was a
companionship”) might be headed. But Tommy, who seemed to have
something different on his mind, just roared with delight and derision:
“Jones and Cohn and Schine. Like three kids playing gumshoe up in
their tree house! Our boy Roy even calls Schine ‘Mr. Chairman’ from
time to time! Dontcha think a little adult supervision might be in
order? There ain’t a single solon in the room. And look at this,”
Tommy added, flipping to the title page of the binder, where he’d
circled “Robert Jones, administrative assistant to Senator Potter.”
For his look of perplexity, Tim earned a playful swat with the
transcript. “‘Administrative assistant’ my Aunt Fanny,” declared
Tommy. “He’s a goddamn researcher, almost as low on this totem
pole as you are, if you’ll forgive me, Mr. Timothy.”
“Is he in trouble?” Tim asked. “Mr. Jones, I mean.”
“All in good time, all in good time. Why don’t you take this
document and put it on his desk, sport? And keep it open to the dogeared page.”
McIntyre then quickly left, no doubt headed back to the cloakroom
machinations over the Republicans’ new minority majority.
Tim walked into the next room and put the transcript on Mr.
Jones’s desk. He could see from some notes on the blotter that
Jones, too, was trawling after statistics on the sea lamprey. But that
was hardly all. The desk, even with no one in the chair behind it,

appeared to be a very busy place. Even more prominent on the
blotter was a cutting from last Wednesday’s Star, a small, discreet
story about a twenty-five-year-old theological student’s conviction for
soliciting an undercover police officer in Lafayette Square. The item
wouldn’t have made the paper at all were the student not the son of
Senator Lester Hunt, a Democrat from Wyoming.
The clipping made Tim burn with a terrible feeling of foolishness.
He could see himself as the hapless theological student and
Hawkins Fuller as Officer John A. Constanzo of the District Police.
For days now he had been imagining the contempt Fuller must be
feeling for him, ever since the sentimental gesture of the book, with
its unguarded inscription, had revealed Timothy Laughlin to be
someone who’d gotten completely the wrong idea about a friendly
chat in Dupont Circle, and completely the wrong idea about Hawkins
Fuller, a normal man whose fraternal, collegial favor—a simple jobhunting tip—had been twisted by the recipient into a distasteful
opportunity to seek another sort of favor entirely.
For each of the last several nights, Tim had been unable to banish
his longing for Fuller, or the stupid, unextinguished hope that the
older man might yet send him a kind note, maybe when he had
finished the Lodge biography. Nor could he cease dwelling on the
ugly probability that the book had been thrown away, along with
whatever few seconds of infinitesimal regard Fuller had had for that
skinny little queer on the park bench.
It was 4:35 p.m. Tim fought the temptation to picture, for the
hundredth time, what Hawkins Fuller must look like sitting at his desk
in the clean aquamarine precincts of the State Department. Instead,
he took one last look at the desktop in front of him and could not
resist picking up the topmost letter on yet another stack of Jones’s
pending concerns. It was typed with a lack of accuracy that seemed
more heartfelt than sloppy:

the Chinese doctor threatened to take me to to the hospital, on
account of my frostbitten feet. My two big toe bones were
sticking out, and the area around them looked real decayed. I
knew that 90 or 95 percent of the men who went to the hospital
never came out of it, so when the doctor left the room for five
minutes, I took a fingernail (all our fingernails were real long and
dirty) and punched it around the bones and broke off both of my
big toes. I threw them across the floor so they’d be out of sight.
The Chinese doctor came back in and he said “you go to
hospital” and I said “nothing doing, my feet are okay,” and he
said “let me look.” And he took a look and I had the bones broke
off, and the feet now didn’t look so decayed and he said “okay”
and went outside the door and never bothered me again. I knew
if I’d gone to the hospital I’d have never got out of it.
This letter from Sergeant Wendell Treffery, recently repatriated from
Korea to the army hospital at Walton, Massachusetts, must be part
of the preparations for Potter’s atrocity hearings.
A second letter in the pile came from Sergeant First Class George
J. Matta, who described the shallow graves he’d seen dug for
American POWs in Korea:
we would come the next time and the rain would have washed
the dirt away and there would be nothing there but bones. We
went back and we got on to them about it, about the people
digging up the graves and taking the clothes. They tried to tell
us it was the dogs that did it, that did the digging. (They must
have had pretty smart dogs that could dig the graves and take
the clothes off the men.) I suppose you could call that
“brainwashing,” but you’ll excuse me if I tell you I think it was
just typical b.s. from these monsters.

This, Tim told himself, was why he was here. Communism—and
whatever could be done about it—was more important than Jones’s
grandstanding, or even McCarthy’s, more important than his own
being in love with some handsome phantom who must now despise
him.
He lingered at Jones’s desk, reading letter after letter from hospital
after hospital. He thought of Father Beane and the missionaries, and
he wondered, guiltily, why his own feet should not be freezing and
bleeding in the Asian snow.

“Can’t say much for the hat,” Beverly Phillips declared. “It looks like
an upside-down lightbulb, don’t you think? The suit’s pretty, though.”
Mary looked hard at the hemline. “That’s still shorter than what I’ve
got, I’m pretty sure. I raised the last of my old skirts a couple of
weeks ago, and I’m not about to drag out the machine again.”
“Ah,” said Beverly. “Your evening with Fuller, right?” She mocked
herself with a sigh: “Some of us are just barnacles on his
dreamboat.”
Mary laughed. “Oh, Jesus, Beverly.”
“I’m sorry. I sound like Miss Lightfoot, God forbid. It’s none of my
business, honey. I also apologize for dragging you here.” This
morning Beverly had asked Mary if she’d like the second of two
complimentary tickets she had for this late-afternoon fashion show at
the Mayflower Hotel. During the past hour the women had finished
off a plate of sandwiches and two cocktails apiece.
“Anything that’s gratis,” said Beverly. “I’m still ‘Helen Holden,
Government Girl.’” When Mary’s expression showed no recognition
of the old radio serial and its plucky, thrifty heroine, Beverly sighed.
“You’re too young to remember. And I’m too old for the part.” Nearing

forty and divorced for several years, Beverly Phillips was raising two
sons, who would soon be waiting for their dinner, up in Friendship
Heights.
The last pair of new outfits started down the makeshift runway.
“Did you see Perle Mesta’s article this morning?” asked Mary. The
city’s best-known hostess was over in Russia, filing pieces with the
Washington Post on the subject of Soviet women.
“About all those butch gals wearing construction helmets and
rebuilding Stalingrad?” Beverly asked.
“She says even the expensive dresses look like junk compared to
what you can get over here for five dollars at Woodie’s.”
“Well, the one that came past me a minute ago cost forty-five
bucks, and I’m not a big enough capitalist for that.”
“Are you sure you won’t join us?” asked Mary. After agreeing to go
to the fashion show, she had phoned her date and told him to meet
her here at the Mayflower.
“Don’t be silly,” said Beverly. “I never mind being a fifth wheel, but
if I don’t get going soon the boys are likely to burn down the house.
So where’s he taking you?”
“We’ll probably wind up having dinner here. Maybe the movies
afterward, though I think the poster for From Here to Eternity scares
him a little.”
“The shy type? I like that. In fact, I’d rather have that than Burt
Lancaster. Who is this non-beast?”
“His name’s Paul Hildebrand. His family owns one of the breweries
along the river.”
“What happened to young Dr. Malone?”

“He’s been operating a little slowly for my taste.”
“So how’d you meet the brewer?”
“It’s embarrassing. Millie Brisson, the secretary to the
congressman who got me my first job—that friend of my father’s—
fixed it up. The poor woman must feel I’ve got her on a lifetime
retainer.”
Beverly reached for her gloves. “Mary, you’re a catch. And I,
personally, would kill to be—what are you, twenty-eight? Anyway, are
things with this guy promising?”
“I’ve got no idea. It’s only a second date.”
“Okay,” said Beverly, a strong believer in realism in these matters,
“when and where was the first date?”
“About ten days ago. The last of those outdoor Watergate
concerts, on the river. He’s been traveling since then.”
“See?” said Mrs. Phillips. “You’re keeping track. You are
interested.”
“He hates politics,” Mary added.
“Grab him,” said Mrs. Phillips.

The temperature was supposed to drop into the forties tonight, so
Tim opened up the window to coax in whatever cool breeze might be
on its way. After work he had stopped into church, and back here
he’d fallen asleep on the couch. He had awakened only a few
minutes ago and changed into a T-shirt and dungarees. Keeping the
radio low, he now listened to Mr. Keen, Tracer of Lost Persons, as he
opened up a can of soup. With most of his old programs turning into

television shows or disappearing altogether, it was nice to know that
this one could still be found on the air at eight o’clock on Friday
nights.
He added water to the pot and decided that once he got past a
couple of paydays, he would call Bobby Garahan and agree to that
dinner at Duke Zeibert’s. His old Fordham friend was now working
for an insurance company down here and thought the two of them
ought to go out one night and act like big knife-and-fork men to
celebrate being grown-up wage earners who lived away from home.
Bobby was sort of dull, but it might be some time before Tim made
friends at work, given how the location of Senator Potter’s office put
him so far from all the other Hill rats over in the SOB. Maybe when
the subcommittee got back from New York, he’d get to spend more
time over there.
Mr. Keen’s voice was giving way to the announcer’s pitch for tooth
powder when Tim heard a knock on the door. He turned off the radio.
Could there really have been a complaint from someone? He was
wearing socks, after all, and had hardly stepped off the thick braided
rug. He moved quietly toward the door, which had no peephole—
another sign of the apartment’s illegality—and cautiously opened it
up.
“You’re not ‘on the phone,’” said Hawkins Fuller, who placed his
hands high on each side of the doorframe. A head taller than Tim, he
smiled down as if from a crucifix.
“I’m not even on the lease.” Tim could feel his face getting very
red. He imagined he was smiling, but wasn’t sure.
“Ah,” said Fuller, “a desperado.” He took his hands from the
doorframe and put them on Tim’s shoulders, moving the smaller man
aside so that he himself could enter the room. He sat down on the
desktop and motioned for Tim to take the chair next to the hot plate.
“Hey,” said Tim, laughing. “Whose place is this, anyway?”

“Not yours, apparently.”
“You’re right. But as long as I lie low, and don’t have any visitors…”
On the desk beside one of Fuller’s flanneled thighs, Tim noticed
the Star’s radio listings. Why couldn’t it be the serious novel that was
open but unnoticeable at the foot of the neatly made bed?
“What’s in there?” asked Fuller, pointing toward the hot plate.
“Chicken noodle soup.” Grateful for something to do besides stare,
Tim went over to stir the pot. “There’s probably enough for two.”
He saw Fuller look at the Campbell’s can and make a face. “Why
don’t you let me buy you supper someplace? You brought me a
book, remember?”
“But that was to thank you. Besides,” said Tim, swallowing the last
inch of a glass of milk he had on the counter, “it’s a sin to waste
food.”
“Mortal or venial?” asked Fuller.
Tim looked into the pot as he resumed stirring. “In this case, I’d
have to say venial.”
“What if you were to let me kiss you, Laughlin? Would that be
mortal or venial?”
It was as if Father O’Connell, made somehow young and beautiful,
had appeared in a dream to examine him for Confirmation.
“Mortal, I’m pretty sure.” He felt the beating of his heart. “How
come a Protestant like you knows stuff like that?”
Further resembling Father O’Connell, Fuller refused to
countenance any wriggling out of the matter at hand. “Would you like
me to kiss you?”

Tim stopped stirring and looked down into the bubbles that began
to hiss around the wooden spoon. “No, Mr. Fuller,” he made himself
say.
“Well, that one’s got to be mortal.”
Tim shut off the hot plate but didn’t turn around. “What do you
mean?”
“If the size of the lie figures in, that one can’t possibly be a venial
sin.”
Fuller got up from the desk. He took down two bowls from the
open shelf. “Spoons?”

“Who is that awful woman?” asked Paul Hildebrand.
“May Craig,” Mary told him.
“Some sort of news-hen?”
“Yes,” said Mary, who had to laugh. How could a native
Washingtonian not know of this character who wrote for a handful of
newspapers up in Maine but managed to attract the continual notice
of presidents? Miss Craig had swept into the Mayflower’s dining
room a few moments ago, around nine-thirty, having just come from
New York and, before that, Morocco, where she’d spent a couple of
weeks in the U.S. Air Force hospital with a touch—“a big touch,” she
now squawked—of food poisoning. She continued in a near-shout: “I
thought Senator You-Know-Who would still be cuddling his bride
down in Nassau when I docked. But there he was, right in Foley
Square!”
Somebody at the table next to Miss Craig’s asked if she’d been
outside the room for “Mr. Lied-and-Cried” this afternoon.

“No,” she admitted, “but that’d be a good headline for tomorrow’s
Daily News!”
Paul Hildebrand swallowed half a chicken croquette and a gulp of
Cutty Sark. “God,” he said softly. “I wish she’d shut up.”
Mary looked across the table and considered her date. It pained
him to make such a remark about a woman, she realized. Yes, he
was old-fashioned, as was the style of his pleasant looks: the threequarter part in the curly dark-blond hair, the slightly reddish
complexion. Was there, beneath, she wondered, more of a spark
than resided in her doctor?
“They were even talking about ‘Mr. Lied-and-Cried’ at the fashion
show,” she finally said.
“That’s only because we’re here,” he replied. “In Washington, I
mean. They wouldn’t have been talking about it in Omaha.” He
mentioned the city without a trace of condescension.
“I doubt the dresses would have been as pretty there.”
“Probably not. Another?” he asked, holding up her own empty
glass of Cutty Sark.
“Yes.”
As he signaled for the waiter, Mary said, “Well, I’m just praying that
he flames out soon.”
Even Paul Hildebrand didn’t need to be told who “he” was, but he
responded with a question: “Know what I’m praying for? Rain. The
drought in the Midwest is driving the price of hops sky-high. You
think the country’s really waiting around and wondering if Ike’s going
to start fighting McCarthy? Mary, most of it just wants him to fire Ezra
Taft Benson and get a new Agriculture secretary. You know, my

brother and I are going to have to dump the brewery into the
Potomac if things don’t get better soon.”
“Are you looking for a new line of work?” asked Mary.
“Not yet,” he replied. “First I’m looking for a girl to marry me.”

Fuller grabbed one of Tim’s wrists, lifted the boy’s arm, and pinned it
to the pillow. Tim surmised the shift in position to be for the greater
comfort of the older man in the narrow bed, until he felt Fuller kiss
his armpit. He froze for a moment, but with the increasing pressure
and sweep of the other man’s mouth, he felt Fuller’s avidity and
abandon transferring themselves to him. He realized he was no
longer caressing Fuller’s thick black hair; he was pulling it, forcefully.
The act seemed to agitate Fuller—to excite or anger him, Tim
couldn’t tell for sure. But the older man, fully aroused, began to press
his body more and more forcefully against him. Tim could see the
damp beginnings of sweat on Fuller’s face and in the hollow of his
neck, where he’d seen it two weeks ago and had thought about its
being every day since. He felt an ardor in his own helplessness,
recognized that what he right now most desired was to have no say
in this, no word about it but yes.
By the time he was in Fuller’s mouth, and digging his clean, bitten
nails into the other man’s shoulders, he could feel the tears on his
own face. He became afraid of losing all physical control, of
ejaculating before he was supposed to. But when, and where, was
he supposed to? Would Fuller tell him? The older man seemed to
sense the approaching climax and relented in his attentions; his face
rose back up and smiled wordlessly into Tim’s.
And then, at Fuller’s unspoken but insistent direction, each of
them was lying on his side, facing the same wall. Fuller grasped him
from behind and held him close, kissing his neck and asking, “Are

you my brave boy?” As Tim nodded yes, Fuller caressed one side of
his face; the other side brushed the sheet. Fuller’s aroma
overpowered the smell of Clorox on the linen, banishing the more
familiar fragrance, the one redolent of a thousand Monday nights
when Tim had fallen asleep on the results of his mother’s wash day.
He turned his head far enough to plunge his face into the muscular
flesh of Fuller’s chest and shoulder. In response, Fuller tousled and
petted his hair, but the next words he said were inflamed, not
soothing. “Who owns you?” Fuller whispered, sharply, into his ear.
It sounded like some early piece of the catechism, a cosmically
important question-and-answer he had somehow missed, on the
order of Who made us? God made us. But Tim’s confusion, and the
desire to respond with the right answer, were lost in his own arousal.
He whispered, “Hawkins Fuller,” not as an answer to the question,
but simply an amazed statement of the other man’s actuality.
“Hawkins Fuller,” he said, repeating this name for a discovery he felt
the need to radio from one world to another, this name for a new
Eden, whose recently glimpsed existence had now been fully
confirmed.

CHAPTER SIX

October 17, 1953
Mary Johnson was awakened in Georgetown by a phone call from
Beverly Phillips. At the first ring, she imagined she was back in her
old place, a block away, which she’d shared with three other girls.
There the phone had always rung early Saturday morning with
someone’s request for a postmortem of someone else’s Friday-night
date.
“You want details,” Mary said, once Beverly had identified herself.
“There aren’t any.” Which was true. It had been a pleasant but early
night whose conversation had turned only moderately flirtatious,
even though she and Paul had been drinking more as if he were heir
to a distillery than a beer business.
“Well,” said Beverly. “As long as there are no gruesome details,
that qualifies as a good second date. I’m afraid I’ve got some
gruesome details on this end.”
“Did the boys burn down the house?”
“No, but Scott McLeod’s set fire to Jerry Baumeister. Canned him.”
Rubbing her eyes, Mary tried to think. Jerry Baumeister. Office of
Educational Exchange? Yes: early thirties; bow tie; made courtly little
jokes. “I hardly know him,” she told Beverly.
“Neither do I. But he’s here, and he’s coming apart.”
“At your house? At seven-thirty in the morning?”

“He practically arrived with the milkman. I think he’d been
wandering around all night. Honest, I barely know him, either, Mary.
A couple of lunches in the cafeteria. We’ve got divorce in common;
he’s got two well-behaved daughters instead of what I’ve got. Hang
on a second. Boys, pipe down! I told you to go to the playground!
Sorry, Mary. Anyway, Jerry’s girls live with him. The ex-wife drinks
and long ago went home to mother. Now he’s wondering how he’ll
feed himself, let alone the daughters.”
“What’s he done to inflame McLeod? He’s a little young to have
been in the Party, isn’t he?”
“It’s more personal than that.”
Mary paused for a moment, no more able than Beverly to use the
real name for what she now realized they were talking about. “Even
with two children?” She knew it was a foolish question.
“Maybe that’s why the wife drank. I don’t know. I also don’t know
what to do. He’s in the next room. I’ve given him three cups of coffee
and two plates of eggs. The man is sobbing, Mary. He thinks he’s
going to be arrested, for God’s sake.”
“What can I do?”
“I’ve no idea. But you actually know a couple of these
congressmen I’ve been typing memos to for six years. Isn’t there one
of them who might apply a little humane pressure?”
“You imagine McLeod will respond to pressure? Let alone the
humane kind?”
“I know, I know. There’s another half dozen they’ve just let go
besides Jerry, and God knows he’s not the prepossessing type
anybody’s going to make a federal case over. Mary, I’m sorry, I don’t
know why I called. His panic’s getting to me. God, maybe I should

marry him. He’d probably still be a better husband than what I was
used to.”
“What exactly do they have on him?”
“Just some odds and ends. Rumors. A sighting of him in a bar he
shouldn’t have been in. Plus things they won’t say. He’s never been
convicted of anything. But he failed their lie-detector test.”
Mary looked at the thermometer outside her window and said
nothing for a minute. “Beverly, give me your number and let me call
you back in a little while.”
She dressed for work, agitated by Beverly’s news and almost
wistful for the cacophony of those Saturday mornings with the
roommates on Q Street, when she’d be hacking through the nylon
kudzu dangling from the shower-curtain rod and discovering that one
of the girls had walked off with her umbrella.
Once out of the house, she moved on foot through Georgetown,
passing the antiques shops and little restaurants. She supposed she
could understand why the neighborhood drew scorn for being home
to the city’s “rich, red, and queer,” even though right now half its
dowagers and old New Dealers were still just heedlessly sleeping.
Soon they would awake to shop for groceries or take a stroll along
the canal with the same fitful anxiety about the Bomb, no more and
no less, as anyone else.
Her mind returned to Scott McLeod and the mystery of why, if the
State Department was so ineffectual, everyone worried about it so. If
the men only pushed cookies, what should be the harm of their doing
it with limp wrists? And why must half the organization have to put in
overtime to help them do it? The government’s Saturday-morning
workday had been disappearing before the war; been reinstated for
the duration; and then dispensed with once again. And now it was
back, at least here and there, thanks to zealousness about the
deficit. Mr. Morton, that bright spot of internationalism, didn’t come in

himself, but the rest of the Congressional Relations staff were
expected to put in an appearance, however loosely policed by the
weekend time clock. With any luck, poor Beverly could keep
attending to Jerry Baumeister and not be missed.
Coming into Foggy Bottom, Mary walked past the chipped
Watergate bandshell and the Negroes’ gingerbread shanties, which
some of State’s employees had begun to buy up and make
charming. She continued past the warehouses and the gasworks,
down toward the old Observatory with its shuttered dome, and,
finally, on into State’s big box. The building had been put up a
decade ago for the War Department, which had outgrown it before
ever moving in. From its new Pentagon across the river, the
Department of Defense, euphemized and elephantine, was happy to
let State have the place.
Three cabinet secretaries had since made the best of it, but that
didn’t mean she, Mary Johnson, would stay indefinitely in these
waxed corridors, down which her low heels now clicked on their way
to CR. She removed her scarf as she crossed the threshhold into the
bureau’s outer office and heard, from farther in, a strong baritone at
work on “Surrey with the Fringe on Top.” Fuller, who sometimes
couldn’t make himself stay through a Thursday afternoon, was here
bright and early on a Saturday morning.
Mary put a piece of paper into the typewriter and then stared at it,
before hearing Miss Lightfoot join Fuller, coquettishly, in song. That
thick-skulled cow who so loved to proclaim herself “nobody’s fool.”
She must live at the Y, thought Mary, or in some ancient
boardinghouse. Surely no roommates would put up with the array of
resentments she so enjoyed displaying here at work, as if they were
a tray of jewelry. The woman seemed to imagine that she glowed
with wit and good sense whenever she decried the uselessness of
Mary’s college degree or the “terrible unfairness” of Beverly Phillips’
having put her husband through law school only to “wind up” as she
had.

But Mary was resentful, too, more than ever—of Fuller. Did he
know about Jerry Baumeister? He was perfectly capable of singing
even if he did.
“Would you like this to go to both Pennsylvania senators?” trilled
Miss Lightfoot, whose hat was visible in Fuller’s doorway. Mary
guessed that the two of them were working on another appeal for
votes against the Bricker Amendment, which would radically limit the
president’s ability to make treaties with foreign powers. Love must
trump politics, thought Mary; she could not imagine that Miss
Lightfoot wasn’t personally in favor of the amendment, a pet
conservative proposal.
“Oh, yes,” said Fuller. “The more the merrier, Miss Lightfoot. I’ll be
back in a flash.”
He emerged from his office, startled to see Mary, who continued to
peer at her typewriter carriage.
“Do you enjoy her company?” she whispered, almost in a hiss.
Fuller sat down on the edge of her desk. “What do you think?” his
expression seemed to say. Mary remained silent.
“We are likely to set an office productivity record for a Saturday
morning,” he cheerfully declared. “Except for you. What’s this blank
page supposed to be?” He tapped the typewriter.
“My letter of resignation.” Visibly upset, Mary rose from her chair.
Fuller followed her into the corridor. “You’re carrying this nostalgia for
Acheson a bit far,” he said.
“Stop playing the handsome idiot.” She paused long enough to
make him certain that he was being insulted, not flirted with. “It just
occurred to me,” she then added, “you’re pretty much my boss. Fire
me, and I’ll get whatever unemployed GS-4’s get.”

Fuller said nothing.
“Do you know they’ve fired Jerry Baumeister?”
“I don’t even know who he is.”
“He is, or was,” Mary explained, “in the office of Educational
Exchange.”
“What’s his problem? Pink or lavender?”
For a moment she would gladly have thrown Fuller himself to
McLeod’s wolves.
“Lavender,” she forced herself to reply.
Again, he said nothing. He seemed to be searching his memory,
trying perhaps to recall whether Jerry Baumeister had been one of
the department’s “summer bachelors,” the type known to make a
pass at another man while his own wife was up in Maine.
“Fuller,” she said, as evenly as she could, “this is not right.”
“Would your resigning be?”
“It would give me the pleasure of making a gesture.”
She saw that he would not be drawn in, and she knew that she
should walk away. But she was too angry for that. “I don’t see any
bags under your eyes,” she told him. “I guess you didn’t have one of
your late nights last night.”
Fuller shrugged. “A moderately late one.”
“Oh? When did you fall asleep?”
“When Irish eyes were smiling,” he answered. And then he
disappeared down the hall.

Maybe he would fire her. Once he was out of sight, Mary
composed herself and returned to her desk. Miss Lightfoot was
singing “People Will Say We’re in Love.”

“We are all back here on Saturday because an urgent situation has
arisen,” Roy Cohn informed everyone in Room 29 of the Federal
Building in New York. “There is a direct conflict in testimony which
we have to resolve.”
The urgency of determining whether or not Mr. Joseph Levitsky
had actually said, upon the arrest of Julius Rosenberg in 1950, “But
for the grace of God there go I,” was, to Levitsky’s lawyer, Leonard
Boudin, debatable at best. Boudin announced that he was instructing
his client, who a decade before had been with the Army Signal
Corps at Fort Monmouth, to plead the Fifth Amendment to all
questions involving Rosenberg and Mr. Carl Greenblum, the man
who had lied and cried in front of the committee yesterday afternoon.
When Senator McCarthy, “in fairness to the witness,” now
informed Levitsky that he would be cited for contempt, Boudin asked
if any members of the committee other than the chairman were
present in the hearing room.
“No,” McCarthy explained. “There is the administrative assistant to
Senator Dirksen, Mr. Rainville, and the assistant to Senator Potter,
Robert Jones.”
For the rest of the morning, Jones himself remained pleased at the
thought of his name being read into the record by the chairman
himself. Otherwise he was principally aware of a new tenseness
between Cohn and John Adams, the army counsel who was here in
the service’s interest to observe the proceedings. Adams had so far
been stressing the absence of any problem between the Pentagon
and McCarthy, but now, as today’s hearing was recessed until

Monday, Jones noted the cool glances exchanged by the army’s
lawyer and McCarthy’s. The chairman tended to ignore Adams, but
McCarthy seemed inexplicably deferential toward Cohn, even
scared. Before questioning Levitsky himself, the senator had almost
sought the young counsel’s permission.
There was no time to puzzle out the incongruity, because to
Jones’s astonishment, McCarthy was now walking toward him. “Bill!”
called the chairman, clapping his shoulder. “Why don’t you come out
to lunch with all of us at Gasner’s? After all, we don’t know how
much longer Dave will be around.” The induction into the army of
committee consultant G. David Schine was said to be imminent.
Jones’s pleasure at being invited trumped any disappointment
over the chairman’s forgetting that he was Bob, not Bill. There might
be an opportunity to straighten that out over lunch, a prospect that
looked even brighter once he got a seat next to McCarthy, with
Adams across from him and Schine and Cohn at the other end of the
table.
“Senator,” Jones asked, while the waiter set down some glasses,
“did you hear what Eleanor said up in Connecticut last night? She
told the League of Women Voters that Roy and Dave are a bigger
threat to the country than Hiss ever was.”
McCarthy, chuckling, seemed pleased. Jones looked down the
table and saw that Cohn, busy regarding Schine, had not overheard.
“You know,” said McCarthy, grabbing a Manhattan off the waiter’s
tray, “the Pentagon could use some guys like you, Bill.” The senator
added, with a certain embarrassment, to avoid offending Adams: “I
don’t mean you’re not all right, John.”
Adams, efficiently ordering from the menu, gave a thin smile to
indicate that no offense had been taken. But then he looked away,
toward Cohn and Schine, and it was McCarthy who seemed a little
hurt.

“So,” Cohn called out, once he’d caught the army counsel’s eye,
“am I going to be allowed in on Tuesday?” The committee had told
Secretary of the Army Robert Stevens, Adams’ boss, that it was
planning a field trip to the radar operation at Fort Monmouth.
“It’s uncertain,” said Adams. “In Stevens’ view, it’s up to the
commanding officer.”
“Communists can get in!” cried Cohn, throwing his napkin onto his
plate. “Whole carpools of them can go to work there for years at a
time! But not me!”
“Roy,” McCarthy said, evenly, “hold on.”
“I will not hold on! We’re getting nothing but excuses and
obstruction. We were promised cooperation.”
Adams crumbled some crackers into his soup. “We have been
very accommodating and will continue to be—”
“Horseshit, John,” said Cohn, who then looked at Schine and
recalled that the hotel-chain heir’s family did not like swearing.
“Baloney! What I want to know most is, what’s going to happen when
Dave’s inducted in two weeks.”
Adams ate a spoonful of clam chowder. “Mr. Stevens will try to find
him something worthy of his talents.”
Schine, handsome and blond, seemed moderately intrigued by
how little it took to get Roy all excited.
“Dave is essential to the operation of this commitee,” insisted
Cohn. “His expertise—”
Knowing that Schine’s expertise had been demonstrated mostly by
his authorship of a pamphlet about communism’s historical perfidy—
an error-filled monograph that had gone into his family’s hotel rooms

like the Gideon Bible—Adams quietly repeated to Cohn that
Secretary Stevens would see what he could do.
“That’s your answer for everything—from clearances to
Communists to KP! Which Dave is not going to be wasted doing with
some bunch of goddamned hillbillies in a barracks!”
Schine put his hand on Cohn’s arm. “Roy, enough. It’s okay.”
“No, it’s not okay.” Sotto voce, he reminded Schine of all the favors
his family had done for Adams during the last couple of weeks up
here in New York—the free hotel rooms, the comped theater tickets.
Then, back to fortissimo, he barked out, for the whole table’s benefit,
statistics on security risks and Communist sympathizers at Fort
Monmouth.
McCarthy grinned nervously at Jones, as if trying to pretend to a
guest that there was nothing seriously wrong with the child at the
end of the table. “Tell me about yourself,” he said to the research
assistant. The chairman indicated to Adams, still methodically
finishing his soup, that it was okay for him to join this precinct of the
conversation instead of Roy’s.
In the course of giving an abbreviated life story—from his birth in
Biddeford, Maine, to his days at Bates College and in the army
during the war—Jones gently clarified the fact that he was a Bob, not
a Bill. Reaching the recent past, he told the chairman: “Before Potter,
I worked for Senator Brewster.”
McCarthy nodded, recalling his retired Republican colleague from
Maine. “Better than that old bag they’ve got in now.”
It was Jones’s turn to laugh, at McCarthy’s scornful reference to
Senator Margaret Chase Smith and her now-famous “declaration of
conscience” against the chairman. “Sir, she couldn’t find her
bloomers, let alone her conscience. Or a Communist.”

McCarthy slapped the tablecloth in appreciation, then signaled for
another Manhattan. He’d decided to skip any food. “So what’s it like
working for Charlie?” he asked Jones.
After a moment’s hesitation, the research assistant answered,
“Oh, he’s a fine guy.” But realizing he had nothing more to say, Jones
boldly changed the subject. “Sir, can you tell me how you plan to
handle Levitsky in open session?”
McCarthy, who proceeded by more or less constant improvisation,
had clearly not given the matter any thought. “Got any ideas?” he
asked Jones.
“Yes, I do,” said the research assistant, seizing his chance. “You
need to leak what he said about Rosenberg to the press. That piece
of testimony where he directly lies.”
“Actually,” said Adams, cutting into his fish, “Levitsky didn’t say
that himself.”
McCarthy invited Jones to respond, which the younger man did
almost immediately. “Does it matter? Greenblum says he said it. And
at this point his word is better than some Fifth-Amendment
Communist’s. If we want to sustain public interest in this, let people
think Rosenberg is still influencing things from beyond the grave.
That’ll scare them a lot more than one more fag at the State
Department. Or at the head of the Democratic ticket.”
McCarthy waved an empty fork to get the interest of the other end
of the table, as if here at last were a topic around which he could
unite the whole family. “Roy,” he called, “you think there are any
reporters still around the Fed building?”
Jones’s mind was moving fast. If he could make himself useful
here, he’d be able to get that drunken leprechaun McIntyre off his
back. Maybe even get himself out of Potter’s office and into the
chairman’s own.

Tim sat in a pew at the front of St. Peter’s fifteen minutes before
Saturday afternoon confessions were to begin. Nearby he could see
two women who had arrived early for the sacrament: an elderly lady,
perhaps eager to begin the only conversation she would have all
week, and a pretty girl his own age, probably hoping to finish here in
plenty of time to get ready for a date.
From the moment he’d reached the corner of Second and C
streets and stood before the church doors, Tim had known that he
would not be entering the confessional this afternoon. The church’s
yellow brick tower and parapets had seemed like a papier-mâché
stage set for one of Shakespeare’s sunniest Italian comedies, just as
here inside, the red-and-green pattern repeating itself from one
stained-glass window to the next resembled Christmas wrapping
paper, the kind whose expense always provoked disapproving clucks
from Grandma Gaffney before she slid her own annual gifts,
unwrapped cartons of cigarettes, across the dining room table to her
daughters and son. Even the plain Ionic columns here inside St.
Peter’s, so different from the blood-streaked marble at St. Matthew’s,
seemed ready to invite Kilroy’s signature or the crayon drawings of
children.
Tim would pray, but he would not confess. He was here to make a
separate peace, the way the Russians had—he’d seen it referenced
in the Lodge biography—during the First World War. Rising from the
pew, he headed to the little chapel, just off the altar, dedicated to the
Blessed Virgin Mary. He had been hiding behind her skirts his whole
life, and as he knelt before the chapel’s rack of tall blue candles, he
felt certain she would understand his predicament. She might not be
part of the Trinity, but her ex officio position, as the intercessor who
had God’s ear, had always made her something like Mrs. Roosevelt,
the person to go to first.

In the Baltimore Catechism, the source of all Tim’s knowledge of
the world above this one, the Trinity had been depicted as a
shamrock—the visual analogy closest to hand for the Irish clergyman
who’d written the text. But what if one added another leaf, the way
one used to, with an artful graft, after hunting in vain for four-leaf
clovers on the small patch of grass in the playground near Holy
Cross? Tim did not plan to worship Hawkins Fuller, but why couldn’t
his love for him be attached to the love he already felt for the actual
Trinity? Had he not, in fact, always been in love, physically and
particularly, with Christ, whose dark, haloed image on every calendar
and classroom wall glowed more handsomely than any man walking
His Earth? Had not Father McGuire, in the first pages of the
catechism, promised a kind of divine romance? God has been very,
very good to you. He thinks more of you than He does of anything
else in this world. To you alone He has given an invitation to live with
Him in heaven forever.
When Hawkins had removed Tim’s shirt and seen the scapular
beneath it, the older man had not seemed surprised, and he had
made no joke. He had hung it, without comment, over one of the
bedposts at the headboard, where, whenever Tim glimpsed it during
the night, it seemed no more out of place—and no less protective—
than it did when draped over his own narrow chest and back.
How many mortal sins had he committed last night? Did each
separate act he and Hawkins performed constitute an individual
transgression, or was their entire three hours together—until
Hawkins left, after some chatter and a tousle of his hair but no actual
goodbye kiss—a single offense? It didn’t matter, because either way,
he, Timothy Patrick Laughlin, was dead. Mortal sin, said the
catechism, kills the life of grace in our souls. That is why the
sacrament of penance is called a sacrament of the dead. And one
could not perform penance without making a confession, any more
than one could make a confession without perfect contrition—which
he did not feel. To his astonishment, he did not want to feel it,
however well he had once mastered Father McGuire’s illustration of

these matters. Elizabeth says: “Anyone who commits even one
mortal sin does more harm than hundreds and hundreds of
earthquakes ever could do.” She is right. As the words came back to
Tim now, he pictured the ground below the 38th Parallel opening up
and swallowing a thousand American soldiers.
Bless me, Father, for I have sinned…. Because he could not say
these words this afternoon, his heart would pound with fear tonight. If
I should die before I wake…Could he live, for even a little while,
without grace—drained of it, like the empty black milk bottle the
catechism drew for a soul with mortal or Original Sin? No. And he
could not take Saint Augustine’s approach, asking to be made pure
but not just now, because the truth—and God loves the truth—was
that Timothy Laughlin had never felt so pure as he had last night.

CHAPTER SEVEN

November 10, 1953
None of the twelve televisions on display at Hecht’s had its sound
up. Eleven of them, this Tuesday night, were tuned to Milton Berle,
cavorting in women’s clothes and silence, while the twelfth showed
Bishop Sheen returning from a commercial break to find that his
blackboard had been erased, as always, by Skippy, the unseen
angel he liked to claim was a member of the cherubim’s Local 20.
The clean slate waited, in the silence, for a word, the name of the
last theme Sheen would take up before the program ended at eightthirty. RECONCILIATION, it turned out to be, and as soon as he’d
written it, Sheen turned his elegant figure and blazing eyes to the
camera.
Tim was almost able to read the bishop’s lips, which he knew
would soon speak the broadcast’s weekly envoi, God love you, that
comforting wish caught somewhere between the subjunctive and
imperative.
Tim figured he could spend another half hour browsing the book
department until the store closed at nine. And then, knowing that
Hawkins didn’t like him showing up till past ten, he would kill another
ninety minutes out on the street. In the past few weeks he’d been to
the apartment on I Street four times, and before each visit, including
tonight’s, he had called hours ahead from a pay phone near his own
room to make sure he’d be welcome.
Exiting the store under a cloudy night sky, Tim wandered through
what was left of Lincoln’s Washington: east on F Street past the
Patent Office and old marble Tariff Building, then all the way down
into Chinatown toward Mrs. Surratt’s boardinghouse. Turning south,

he made his way to Pennsylvania Avenue, where he began to walk
in the opposite direction from the one he’d traveled on the streetcar
six weeks ago with the then anonymous Hawkins Fuller. Passing the
White House and looking at the lights in the residence, Tim
wondered if Eisenhower would be up late deciding whether to
support or criticize HUAC’s subpoena of Harry Truman. All these
years later, Attorney General Brownell was now insisting that the expresident had knowingly promoted a Communist at Treasury named
Harry Dexter White.
The snow from Friday’s freak blizzard was already gone. Tim now
recalled setting out for Hawkins’ apartment that night, after it had
started coming down. Although he’d been greeted with the gentle
ministrations of a terry-cloth towel, he had even then not been asked
to stay the night. Around two a.m. Hawkins had drawn attention to a
lull in the storm and matter-of-factly discovered an extra pair of
galoshes that would just about fit Tim.
Who, he’d wondered, had been their previous owner? But he had
not asked. After all, nearly a month since their first hours in his own
bed on Capitol Hill, he and Fuller had yet to take a walk together or
share a meal. Hawkins had once shown up, unannounced, at the
room above the hardware store, bearing a quart of milk (a joke) and
a candy bar. They had eaten the candy bar in bed, but that hardly
ranked with going out to a restaurant or making supper together.
Were he and Hawkins having an “affair”? Actually, Tim couldn’t
see that the word, with its implications of brevity and furtiveness, did
the situation justice. Devoid of any previous romantic experience, he
had lived these three weeks as an eternity of happiness. This wasn’t,
he told himself, even technically like Back Street, since Hawkins,
thank God, had not turned out to be married. That possibility, the ne
plus ultra of Tim’s imaginings about the worldly and perverse, had
been lifted from his mind the first night he had walked into Fuller’s
almost comically authentic bachelor apartment on the fifth floor of
2124 I.

Reentering the pale brick building tonight, Tim decided to take the
stairs instead of the elevator to number 5B, partly to experience a
pleasant envy of the career girls and med students who got to live in
such proximity to Hawkins—but mostly to kill a last minute of time,
enough to put him past ten-thirty on his graduation wristwatch.
“It’s open,” said Hawkins, above the clatter of kitchen cleanup.
In Tim went, but only past the threshhold. From that spot he stared
into Hawkins’ bedroom through its half-open door. He could see the
Norwegian flag, half curled up like the tin of a sardine can, a
souvenir of the Fulbright year. On the floor were sneakers and a Tshirt—used, Tim supposed, late this afternoon in the twice-a-week
handball game Hawkins played at the GWU gym. Tim felt an even
stronger desire to take hold of the shirt, to put his face against it,
than he did to rush into the kitchen and touch Hawkins himself—as if
the saint’s relics would provide an equally keen, but less risky, jolt
than the saint. He forced his eyes away from the shirt and sneakers,
and away from the framed photograph of Hawkins’ parents, who
surely couldn’t, any more than his own, imagine or tolerate what
would happen tonight in this bedroom.
And then, there, all at once, wearing dark suit trousers and a white
shirt, the sleeves rolled up and his arms still wet—stood Hawkins
himself.
“Hi, buddy.” Hawkins’ arm fell across his shoulder, helping to lead
him to the living-room couch, where, until he was encircled by both
arms, there would be several minutes of conversation, during which
he would probably learn another few facts of Hawkins’ life story: the
name of a sister or childhood pet, the location of his boat on the day
Japan surrendered. While scavenging these bits of knowledge, Tim
would feign casualness, like an undercover agent in East Berlin.
Desperate to avoid expulsion, he would never try the patience of his
quarry by asking one question too many.

Hawkins poured them both an inch of rye whiskey from the bottle
on the coffee table—a real drink, not the dulce de leche (another
milk joke, out of Guys and Dolls) that he’d been offered his first time
here. Tim hardly needed the alcohol to be unlocked like Sister
Sarah, but he knew a shot of it would complete his abandonment,
would make him crave and even ask for whatever piece of action or
technique Hawkins had last time had to coax him toward with a
soothing interrogative or sharp, warning whisper.
Tim looked past the coffee table at See It Now. The television was
barely louder than the ones in Hecht’s, and Hawkins now made it
clear he hadn’t actually been waiting for Edward R. Murrow to come
on with the latest about Trieste and Harry Dexter White. “The thing’s
been running since Pantomime Quiz,” Hawkins informed him, as if
the television were just some curiously animate table on which he’d
rested two Lena Horne records and his hat. Tim nodded, his eyes
leaving Murrow in order to proceed with his usual inventory: the extra
alarm clock; the Harvard diploma; the necktie from Saltz Brothers
draped over the diploma’s frame.
“I’m sure you can read more of it than I can,” said Hawkins,
pointing to the diploma’s Latin text.
Tim smiled. “Do you really think there’s not a single Communist on
their faculty?” Harvard’s new president had declared exactly that,
yesterday, in response to McCarthy.
“Harvard doesn’t need Communists,” said Fuller. “The Ivy League
undergraduate mentality is already more collective than anything
you’d find on a Soviet wheat farm.” He made some robotic rowing
movements that had Tim laughing just before the telephone rang.
The caller was somewhere so noisy that Fuller tried covering his
free ear to hear him better. “You sound like you’re down at the Jewel
Box,” he shouted over the apparent din on the other end. “You are?”
he asked, laughing, his voice higher than usual. “Well, let me get

back to you tomorrow.” A second call, almost immediately after the
first, was from Fuller’s mother; he told her, too, that he would ring
back the next day.
“Mother is bored with Father,” said Hawkins, returning to the couch
and once more putting his arm around Tim. “She needs a new
cause. Getting Eisenhower nominated wasn’t much of one, and it’s
been made obsolete by its own success.”
“I did my own small bit for that,” said Tim, knowing he was setting
himself up to be teased. He told Hawkins of how, while at Fordham,
he had worked part-time, mostly running errands, for Tex McCrary’s
public relations firm. “You weren’t aware of my proximity to the
famous, were you?” he asked, hoping to provoke some laughter and
roughhousing. “I had to pass out leaflets at the big Draft Ike rally in
Madison Square Garden. My father wanted Taft, and he was not
pleased.”
“Neither was mine,” said Hawkins. “I was at the rally, too.”
“You’re kidding,” said Tim, almost wheeling out of his embrace.
“Accompanying my mother. And thereby annoying my father, who
reminded me that a State Department employee shouldn’t be at such
a gathering.”
Tim’s mind was far away from politics and the Hatch Act. He had
soared into the realm of romance and fate, and before he could stop
himself, he asked: “I wonder what would have happened if we’d met
there, that day, instead of in Dupont Circle.” He winced as soon as
the words—too presumptuous—were out of his mouth.
Hawkins grinned from his well-defended battlement. “You’d have
been sorely disappointed.”
“How so?” said Tim, the whiskey putting him in for a penny, in for a
pound.

“Because I had an assignation that night with a musician. Who,”
Hawkins said, pulling Tim close enough for whispering, “does things
you haven’t even dreamed of.” He pulled back in time to catch the
blush he knew this would raise. “A clarinet player in Hell’s Kitchen.”
“I’d have walked you to his apartment,” said Tim, after only a few
seconds’ hesitation. “On the way I’d have shown you where I used to
go to school and church.”
The scenario was ridiculous, and yet so likely that both men
laughed. Even so, Tim was soon feeling bad about himself: pride
might be a sin, but self-mortification, detached from penance, could
be one, too. He reached for the tumbler of rye, his arm knocking into
Fuller’s, which he realized had raised itself, tenderly, in order to
caress his face. There was a softness, a sense of pathos and
protection in Hawkins’ expression, that he had never seen. But the
collision of their two arms caused Hawkins to withdraw the gesture
and replace the look on his face with one of relief—the look of a man
who was, upon further reflection, pleased not to have given away
something he didn’t need to.
Swallowing more whiskey, Tim asked: “Does your mother ever fix
you up with girls?” His own parents, curiously tactful, never seemed
to try. Hawkins said nothing. Tim bit down on an ice cube and tried to
blunt the query with playfulness: “She’s probably too busy beating
them away from the door.”
Hawkins unbuttoned his own shirt. “She does do a little
matchmaking for yours truly. And of course she’ll succeed at it one of
these days.”
Tim tried to hide the revulsion and fear coming over him by
pressing his face against Hawkins’ now bare chest.
“But that doesn’t amount to a terribly compelling crusade,” said
Hawkins, as he removed Tim’s eyeglasses. “What she should really
carry the banner for is religion. You know, she’s more than a little

attracted to your people. I think she imagines herself as Loretta
Young or Mrs. Luce, converting herself at the feet of Fulton J.
Sheen.”
“I was watching him tonight, on a TV at Hecht’s.” Tim was relieved
to think they might be finding their way back to the more usual
precincts of raillery.
“Well, Mother was no doubt watching it up on Seventy-fourth and
Park. I’ve seen it with her several times myself. I’m sure what she
really wishes is that we still had an Irish maid she could LadyBountifully invite to join her on the sofa.”
“You’re talking about your mother,” said Tim, poking Hawkins’
thigh.
“No, we’re talking about you,” said Fuller, drawing Tim up so that
their two faces were only inches apart. “Tell me, Skippy, how’d you
escape Local 20 of the cherubim? Why didn’t they make you into a
priest?”
For the same reason you should never be a husband, he wanted
to say.
“Maybe because I like doing this too much instead,” he settled for
answering. He kissed Hawkins’ neck, receiving in return only a
familiar, opaque smile, as if “this,” and all it signified, did not even
register. Was Hawkins ever really conscious, Tim wondered, of their
doing anything at all? Or had he somehow made “this” into an
automatic, harmlessly recurring condition, like sleepwalking?
Hawkins lifted him from the couch, and turned off the television.
Once they were in the bedroom and he was removing the last of his
clothes, the older man finally said, “Of course, there’s my father’s
great dilemma to consider, too.”

Tim propped himself up on the pillow, surprised at what seemed to
be a waiver of the rules. He prepared for the imparting of real,
personal information, unprompted by any risky question of his own.
Hawkins flopped onto the bed, holding a shiny brochure. “The old
man is deciding whether he can permit himself to drive an automatic
transmission—or whether that’s something that was never meant to
be, like filter tips.” He climbed on top of Tim and, between kisses,
began a comic recitation of the advertisement. “‘Now your hand, foot,
and mind are completely free from all gear-shifting work,’” he
whispered. Tim remembered to laugh, but this transposition of the
brochure’s promises, accompanied by Hawkins’ insistent touch, was
ludicrously thrilling, a smoothly narrated trip into the helplessness he
sought. “‘Masters the steepest grades without asking a thing of you,’”
said Hawkins, who shut the light and placed one hand under the
small of his back. “‘Instant response to throttle.’”
When they were through, Tim held on to Hawkins in the dark for as
long as he could, knowing he would soon hear the serious joke
about this being a school night, and how he ought to get home so
that come morning he would be fresh for “Citizen Canes,” as
Hawkins liked to call Potter. But for the moment he could feel the
beating of their hearts, at different rates, and recognize in Hawkins’
touch a fondness, an attachment, that was sanctioned only by the
dark.

At that same hour, a mile or so away, Mary Johnson was sitting
down to a late supper with Jerry Baumeister at the Occidental. She’d
already had an early one with Paul Hildebrand, whom she was now
seeing happily enough almost every other night, but Jerry’s invitation
had been urgent. His thin, ordinarily pleasant face seemed pallid. He
had picked, she noted, the most brightly lit corner of the most
respectable place imaginable, close by the Willard Hotel and White
House.

His girls were with his mother, who lived over in Arlington, not far
from his own place. “She thinks I’ve been ‘laid off,’” he explained. “By
the way, she also thinks I have a date. And she highly approved of
your vital statistics, which I provided to satisfy her curiosity.”
“Well,” said Mary, “as far as dates go, I could do worse.”
“No, you couldn’t,” said Jerry. He paused for a moment, as if taken
aback by his new self-loathing. “And I suppose the dear old thing has
a point about my being ‘laid off.’” He joked that the federal
government’s dismissal of fourteen hundred security risks was
assisting the attrition through which it was supposed to shed itself of
fifty thousand civilian employees by next June. “Our—your, I should
say—department is certainly doing its bit. State’s getting rid of two
people a week.” He had almost, Mary noted, said “perverts” instead
of “people,” seeming to decide before the word’s first syllable was
fully out that this was more than he could bear.
“I honestly don’t think all this would have happened under Adlai,”
said Mary, sipping a Dubonnet and knowing that, in fact, she
wouldn’t be the least surprised if Stevenson had felt compelled to
expand the government’s security program in just the way
Eisenhower had done, putting everyone’s personal quirks on the
same level of importance as their loyalty.
“I voted for him, you know,” said Jerry. “Eisenhower.” He slugged
back the last of a double. “Not that that matters. What matters is that
I’m supposed to be ‘blackmailable.’ And ergo, I must go. You know,
from my standpoint, blackmail would be better than what the past
month’s been like. It would certainly be cheaper. Presumably I’d get
to keep part of my paycheck.”
“Jerry, I can pay—”
Realizing the false signal he’d given, he raced to restore malefemale economics. “Oh, Jesus, Mary, I didn’t mean that. I asked you
—as soon as Beverly called me up to say that you’d done something

‘really extraordinary.’ Those were her words, though she thought the
details should be left for you to explain.”
“I didn’t really do—”
He waved a hand in protest, cutting her off, as if to prolong the
anticipation of good news, to keep the wonder of its existence from
being disproved. “You know, I still don’t know what the ‘M’ in
‘Miscellaneous M Unit’ stands for,” he said. “Maybe just McLeod
himself, though he wasn’t there for my questioning. I guess there are
so many cases that he has to save himself for the big ones—Yale
men, I suppose, instead of guys like me from Western Reserve. I
wonder, though, if he knew he was getting a Lutheran with me. I
suspect he thought from my name that I was just one more Jew to
bother. Maybe he would have shown up if he’d realized.”
Mary wished Jerry would stop. He reminded her of a Tulane boy
who’d once cried on her sorority-house porch halfway through a
confession of some hazing humiliation. She feared that Jerry,
already moving fast through a second double, was about to shed
tears himself.
“Almost nobody actually ‘confesses,’” he continued, sounding
more composed, taking on the manner of someone explaining a
little-known principle of chess or bookbinding. “Though I’ve heard of
one guy who, after he spilled everything, actually sent them a thankyou note.” There was a pause, which Mary took as Jerry’s invitation
either to laugh or cry, before he resumed in a straightforward,
insistent tone. “That I did not do.”
He said it with actual pride, as if by not expressing gratitude to
McLeod he had managed to salvage something from the situation.
“I don’t know who that guy was,” Jerry continued, now a bit
sarcastically. “You know, ‘we’ don’t all know one another.”
“I understand, Jerry.”

“I’m sorry. I don’t mean to sound however I sounded. The sad truth
is, Mary, if I’d known the name of one homosexual in the department
—I mean knew it for sure—I’d have given it to them.”
She would have preferred the earlier look of pathetic pride to the
expression of shame now sweeping his face.
“I’ve seen Senator Fulbright,” she at last interrupted. “He and my
daddy were Rhodes scholars together. I talked to him about my
troubled feelings. I didn’t mention you specifically.” Sitting across
from Jerry was worse than it had been sitting across from Fulbright,
who’d seemed appalled that a well-brought-up Southern girl should
be aware of such things, let alone bothering him with them.
Jerry said nothing. He appeared to be waiting for the story’s
climax, the miraculous news whose pleasure he had deferred. And
she had nothing like that to give him.
“He really just pursed his senatorial lips, Jerry. He said he might
call Mr. Morton, my boss in CR, to ask one or two ‘concerned
questions’ of a general nature.”
She feared that Jerry would be crushed to realize the paltriness of
her “extraordinary” action, but he now looked at her with an
enormous smile—at which she felt obligated to throw cold water.
“Jerry, he’s never going to make that call.”
“Oh, I know that,” he replied, his smile undiminished. “But you
were swell to do what you did. When Beverly said you’d done
something great, I never figured it was this great. It’s the first fine
thing I’ve heard since I started looking for work. Which, by the way,
I’ve found. At a hardware store in Falls Church. The job pays two
dollars an hour. Think I’ll get to use that master’s degree in French?”
The smile was coming, Mary realized, not only from sincere
gratitude, but also from his now being drunk. He put his glass down
a little harder than was necessary and, with a glazed look that could

almost have been construed as romantic, asked her: “Do you know
what they do with guys like me in Russia?”

CHAPTER EIGHT

November 26, 1953
At seventy-seven, Grandma Gaffney remained drier and tougher
than her Thanksgiving turkey. The bird’s insides were just as bad:
none of the widow’s offspring could ever detect a single ingredient to
her stuffing besides water, flour, and thyme. And yet no one was
willing to suggest that she cede control of the dinner’s preparation
and location. Even in these spacious Stuyvesant Town days, the
family continued to gather in Grandma Gaffney’s Ninth Avenue
railroad apartment, only a block from where the old woman had lived
through the Blizzard of ’88 as a twelve-year-old girl. Her oft-told tale
of sliding down the drifts that had reached the second-floor window
carried no wistfulness; she’d needed to get out of the tenement any
way she could, she’d explained to Timmy the first time she told him
the story. She was already working, dressing the hair of those snotty
boarding-school girls, Protestants every one, over on the East Side.
Eight other people had squeezed around her dining room table
this afternoon: two daughters and two sons-in-law; her unmarried
son, Alan; her grandchildren Tim and Frances; and Frances’s
husband, Tom Hanrahan. Nine people if you counted the baby
Frances was carrying. The child’s annunciation had been the chief
news and only source of real merriment around the table, whose
centerpiece consisted, as always, of a dozen celery stalks, leafy
ends up, in a cut-glass vase. The windows remained covered not
with lace curtains but paper shades that appeared, like so many of
Grandma Gaffney’s possessions, oddly defiant.
Uncle Frank, whose three grown sons were off with their wives’
families, had made a joke about Timmy’s “falling behind” in the
grandchild-producing department, which occasioned laughter from

everyone but Uncle Alan, who, Tim had to concede, didn’t laugh
much over anything. Frances had led the saying of grace, including
in it an expression of thanksgiving for the cease-fire in Korea. Since
this political development had made a call-up of Tom’s reserve unit
less likely, Grandma Gaffney had allowed the prayer to proceed
without any overt disapproval, though she was known to regard
grace as “something the Protestants say,” and during the canned
fruit–cocktail course had tried to imagine what Father Coughlin—if
the Jews hadn’t forced him off the radio—would think about allowing
the Communists to keep half the Korean peninsula.
Tim now busied himself washing the dishes. He normally did them
with Frances but had today insisted she stay off her feet, even if she
was less than two months along. His gesture allowed her to join the
crush in front of the television in the small parlor. Paul and Rosemary
Laughlin had a year or so ago purchased the TV for Grandma
Gaffney, who had pronounced a favorite cryptic anathema on the
givers—“Buy another and then stop”—before becoming intensely
devoted to this latest modern wonder. Frances, arriving midmorning
to face certain rejection of her offer to help with the cooking, had
later sworn to Tim that Grandma’d kept the television on for the halfhour broadcast of the Gimbel’s parade from Philadelphia, and then
promptly switched it off when coverage shifted to Macy’s own parade
right here in New York—a demonstration of lingering resentment
over a tablecloth the store had refused to take back in 1934.
Tim had grown up in an apartment almost identical to this one, but
the Gorgon-like presence of his grandmother (who adored him and
disliked Frances, for reasons unclear to both grandchildren) had
rendered this place a sort of enchanted cave. Its heat still came from
a coal furnace in the basement tended by an Italian super who had
always let Tim play down there. Once he reappeared inside the
apartment’s little vestibule, Grandma Gaffney would brush the dust
from his hair and face and tell him he looked like Little Black Sambo.

As he scrubbed the cutlery, Tim went from remembering the coal
dust to recalling the condensation on his eyeglasses that Hawk had
wiped off with his handkerchief yesterday at lunchtime. There’d been
a call for Tim at the office, asking that he be at the Capitol Hill
apartment at twelve-fifteen. He’d raced over and found Hawk already
there, inside the foyer near the radiator, standing in his Harris tweed
topcoat and flipping through Newsweek; his car was parked out
front. He would be driving to New York, he said, as soon as the two
of them finished “visiting.” They had laughed at the word while racing
up the stairs.
Hawk had never asked about his own Thanksgiving plans, but Tim
had made haste to say that he needed to work through the afternoon
and couldn’t depart D.C. until six o’clock, when he’d be getting a bus.
Failure to acknowledge this impediment would have made him
available to ride to New York with Hawk—an invitation he feared
might not be forthcoming.
As it happened, he did have to work, making long-distance calls to
two of the POWs set to testify next week. Neither turned out to be
much older than himself, and each had called him “sir.” Now, a day
later, plunging his hands back into the hot dishwater, he recalled the
tales of horrific cold that he’d heard from one of them, whose
frostbitten feet, like Senator Potter’s, had been left behind a world
away.
By the time Tim joined everyone in the parlor, the television was
flickering with images of the Salvation Army dinner for bums on the
Bowery. Political discussion overrode the TV’s picture and sound.
Ethel Rosenberg’s brother had just yesterday given the committee a
written statement about how spying might still be going on at Fort
Monmouth, a speculation to which Uncle Frank now gave loud
assent. Tim worried that this mention of the Rosenbergs would soon
have Grandma Gaffney unleashing a fusillade of complaints against
the “sheenies,” the most arcane of her many terms for the Jews.
When he had been a little boy, and the TV-star bishop just another

voice on the radio, Tim had surmised the word to be a name for the
followers of Fulton J. Sheen. If Grandma Gaffney came out with it
now, Uncle Frank would be sure to laugh, while Paul and Rosemary
Laughlin would remain silently disapproving—not from any real
moral opprobrium they attached to the word, but only a sense of its
being a crude immigrant relic, like the coal pile in the basement or
Grandma Gaffney’s bad teeth, something with which their newly
middle-class children shouldn’t be saddled.
“So, Timmy,” Uncle Frank fairly shouted, “did you have a hand in
that speech the other night?” He meant McCarthy’s eleven-p.m.
radio-and-TV address. It had been billed as an equal-time rebuttal to
Truman’s broadcast on the Harry Dexter White case, though in the
event, McCarthy had spent more time attacking the current president
than the former one, with a claim that Ike was “batting zero” against
Communists in government.
Tim politely shook his head. “Uncle Frank, except for his wedding,
I’ve never even seen McCarthy. He’s mostly been up here in New
York.” The committee, Tim explained, had the other week done a
little investigation of General Electric, before returning its attention to
Fort Monmouth. But such details didn’t matter to Uncle Frank: Tim’s
work for Charles Potter gave him in the eyes of everyone here, even
Frances, an admirable proximity to the senator from Wisconsin.
However much Tim tried to correct them, his family regarded him as
a lucky oblate to an all-powerful monsignor.
The White case—with the once-more-front-page Truman calling
the attorney general a liar, and J. Edgar Hoover branding Truman a
liar in return—had all the elements to sustain long discussion, save
one. “Where’s McCarthy in all of this?” Uncle Alan asked Tim, at a
decibel level low enough to indicate actual curiosity. “I mean aside
from that speech.”
“It’s really HUAC’s show,” explained Tim, who realized with a touch
of shame that he was tossing off such lingo to convey the very

insiderliness he’d been trying to disclaim at dinner. But he had heard
Tommy McIntyre remark that the White story was “making old Joe
emerald with envy” each day it gobbled up the lion’s share of column
inches in the papers.
Political news soon gave way to neighborhood reminiscence. Talk
of the Donahues, who’d recently moved from Fiftieth Street to
Mineola, ushered the family toward a collective sleepiness. The
television was at last turned off, and Tim began to hear the tick of the
clock near the old radio cabinet, a kind of telegraph tapping out the
unvaried existence of Uncle Alan and Grandma Gaffney, who
sometimes seemed more married than his own parents. He noticed
the thickness of the paint—another layer added by the landlord every
five years—on the square strip of molding that ornamented the
room’s plaster walls. And he also regarded the telephone, which had
come into the apartment only a few years before the TV. I’m not on
the phone.
With the same finger he’d yesterday used to trace circles on
Hawkins’ bare chest, he could right now, if he chose, dial the Charles
Fuller family, who were in the Manhattan book. What might be going
on in those rooms at Seventy-fourth and Park, high above the
doorman and flower-filled lobby that Tim could picture? Behavior
there could scarcely be more specified or formal than here. Even
now, Tim and his father and uncles had yet to loosen their ties, pride
in their white collars supplementing a deference both to the day and
to the family matriarch.
As conversation grew more intermittent, Tim’s discomfort
increased, as if, without much else on their minds and tongues, his
parents and uncles and aunts would somehow be able to see
images, like stigmata beginning to bleed, of his naked hour with
Hawkins Fuller.
“Grandma,” he said, too nervous to sit still any longer, “I’m going to
wrap up some of the leftovers and take them to the church. The

icebox won’t hold everything.”
“All right, Timmy,” she replied, all but adding “if you must.” She
tended to view charity not as a corporal work of mercy but a species
of busybodiedness, and yet, as a “nice boy”—her designation,
seeming to signify a handicap that made certain actions unavoidable
—Timmy “did such things.”
Out on the street, carrying a bag of waxed-papered turkey and
asparagus spears, Tim drew a great cleansing breath of the city’s
dirty air. He passed the corner of Forty-third Street and looked down
to the old building where he knew Hawkins’ clarinet player—the one
from the day of the Draft Ike rally—must still have his apartment.
Closing his eyes, he thought of yesterday, when Hawk had been
inside him, and he wondered if he weren’t now really more closely
connected to this musician—at just one physical remove—than to
everyone still sitting back in the parlor.
He found himself saying aloud a couple of lines from Dylan
Thomas, the ones Tommy McIntyre had come into the office reciting
the other day:

Time held me green and dying
Though I sang in my chains like the sea.

The Welsh poet had died in mid-bender here in New York only a
couple of weeks ago. “Ah,” Tommy had said with Irish reverence and
envy, “he should have been one of ours, Mr. Tim. He should have
been one of ours.”
The lines of verse vanished onto the breeze racing down Ninth
Avenue ahead of Tim, just as yesterday, in the apartment on Capitol

Hill, his own whispering of the words “I love you,” barely but
deliberately audible, had disappeared into the pillow and walls,
unanswered except for two gentle pats on the back of his head.

CHAPTER NINE

December 2, 1953
“Our orders was to hold at all costs,” said Sergeant Weinel, “and that
is what we was doing. We was holding at all costs.”
Even so, the sergeant’s unit had at last been overrun, on August
30, 1950, by the village of Chinju near the Naktong River, and that’s
why he was here today, three years later, in the Caucus Room of the
Senate Office Building. After the unit’s forced march from Chinju to
Taejon, Sergeant Weinel testified, he and his sixty buddies had been
beaten, indoctrinated, denied medical care, and put on display in
North Korean villages; and then—with the exception of the sergeant
himself—they had been massacred by their captors.
He explained his own survival to Senator Potter and the
Permanent Subcommittee on Investigations: “Yes, sir; they covered
me over with dirt, too. It was just loose dirt, with enough to cover my
head up. I laid there and after they got through I could breathe
through that loose dirt.”
As if fearing that heroism might be ascribed to him, Sergeant
Weinel quickly shifted the committee’s attention from his success at
playing possum to the last efforts of those actually dead. “Out of the
whole bunch that was shot there, I never heard one man ask for
mercy; none of them did. In fact, there was one of the boys that
wasn’t hit good, and he even asked them to give him another. Out of
that many men, nobody cracked.”
With this recollection Sergeant Weinel choked up, and appeared
to be on the verge of sobs, which he managed to restrain when

Senator Potter, rising to his artificial feet, leaned across the
committee table to pass him a cigarette.
Watching from a seat behind his boss’s chair, Tim felt his own
hand trembling from some internal tumult of anger and fear, all of it
overlaid and trumped by shame. Had he been in Sergeant Weinel’s
company, he would have cracked, and long before they reached
Taejon. He would have begged for mercy and been killed by the
enemy in full view of his own contemptuous comrades.
Sergeant Weinel quickly regained his composure, nodding while
Potter explained how the evidence they were gathering suggested
that the North Koreans had begun a coordinated effort to kill POWs,
in numerous locations, on the day the sergeant’s group was
slaughtered. “It had to be a command order rather than a prison
order,” the senator reasoned. He was especially interested in the
timing of a visit to the prison by a North Korean higher-up, a
propaganda speaker, shortly before the massacre.
One could argue that a cover-up of the atrocities extended all the
way to the Soviet Union—and beyond. Just yesterday, Vishinsky, the
Russians’ UN ambassador, had declared with a theatrical yawn, and
considerable support, that the United States’ heavily documented
report on war crimes was just fantasy. But, Potter insisted, the
particulars with which Sergeant Weinel and the other men were now
harrowing the Senate proved otherwise. “When a Red Chinese
nurse cuts off the toes of a GI with a pair of garden shears, without
benefit of anesthesia, and wraps the wounds in a newspaper, this
makes a liar out of Vishinsky.”
In the row of chairs behind the committee, Tommy McIntyre leaned
over to Tim and whispered, “Charlie sounds half like a senator today.
Too bad his luck’s not a little dumber.” He pointed to the dearth of
press at the back of the room. No television cameras, and only half
as many reporters as would be there ordinarily: a strike by photo
engravers had shut down the New York papers. McCarthy, Tommy

had explained, was relieved that a break in the Fort Monmouth
hearings should be occurring while there were no headlines to be
had in Manhattan. The chairman, present here today and all
modesty, had told newsmen, “It’s Charlie’s hearing,” when he
entered the Caucus Room this morning. “He’s been a one-man task
force on this important issue.”
Seeing him now in half profile, Tim could sense McCarthy’s
boredom with the whole undertaking, this bit of pro bono work where
the witnesses were praised instead of pilloried. As a display of his
supposed confidence in the Michigan senator, McCarthy had told the
reporters that Potter was free to disagree with his own approach to
the POW issue, which involved getting tough on any country still
trading with Red China, including Britain. “I myself believe it’s time to
stop sending perfumed notes to our supposed allies,” he’d said,
repeating a choice image from his pre-Thanksgiving speech.
Tim had hoped to see Cecil Holland from the Star here this
morning, but the day’s real action was over at the White House,
where at a news conference Ike would—or would not—back up
Dulles’s own rebuttal of McCarthy’s speech. There was also, here in
the Caucus Room, no sign of Roy Cohn, who doubtless thought the
hearings a digression beneath his notice. Even Robert Jones,
Potter’s own staffer, had gone to get a haircut in the Senate
barbershop. Well, Tim would at least be able to tell Uncle Frank that
he’d once more seen McCarthy, albeit the back of his head.
After a Pfc’s testimony about a chaplain who’d been shot in the
back while giving the last rites, the hearing was recessed for lunch.
Tim had to do without eating, since he’d been assigned to prepare
the witnesses’ travel vouchers in the committee’s office space down
the hall. He’d hand them out once the men had had their meal and
turned in their receipts. But before he left the Caucus Room he
walked up to Sergeant Weinel to shake his hand and say thank you
—not just for his testimony, he hoped the man would understand, but
for what he’d endured in Korea. As Weinel mumbled, “You’re

welcome,” Tim noted a smirk on the face of a reporter witnessing the
exchange, and he wondered if he’d violated some protocol. When
the newsman began to shake his head in what looked like knowing
disgust, Tim felt something angry flare up inside himself. “What did I
do wrong?” he asked the reporter, trying to make it sound like a
genuine request for information. But his emotions were running high,
and he found it hard to keep the edge out of his voice. “I’m Timothy
Laughlin,” he added, extending his hand without a smile.
“Kenneth Woodforde, The Nation,” responded the reporter, whose
facial expression, beneath a lot of curly auburn hair, had turned
almost pitying. “Tell me, fella, don’t you think these guys are just as
much on display here as they were in those Korean villages?”
Tim looked at him blankly. “No, of course I don’t.”
“Well, guess again, buddy boy. They’re trotting out these freshfaced farm kids—victims of big bad communism—to inflame support
for the committee’s real work.”
“Which is?”
“A gigantic domestic purge.”
“You don’t think these soldiers suffered?” asked Tim. At the start of
the hearing, General Ridgway himself had testified that there was no
precedent for the kind of atrocities being described.
“War is hell,” said Woodforde, with even more sarcasm than
before. “Bad things happen. So do exaggerations and outright lies.”
“You sound like Vishinsky,” said Tim, who immediately wondered if
the insult wasn’t beyond the pale.
“Well, I’d rather have worked for his Joe than for your Joe.”

Tim was about to say “I work for Senator Potter,” but Woodforde
had already walked away. So he stood for a moment by himself, in
silence, outraged over the idea that he should be ashamed to serve
McCarthy, however indirectly.
He looked at Sergeant Weinel, now near the exit, and thought of
him trying to breathe through the dirt and the corpses while
pretending to be one of them.
Down the corridor, inside the committee’s workroom, Tim found
that Robert Jones, freshly shorn, had taken a seat next to Roy Cohn,
who was now delivering an agitated monologue into a telephone.
“Laughlin!” called out Jones. “Which one of those fellows who
testified is from Maine?”
Tim consulted his clipboard and found the name of the private
from Augusta whose pus-filled arm had been slammed with a North
Korean’s rifle butt on the march to Taejon.
“Do not,” said Jones, “repeat—do not—allow Margaret Chase
Smith to get her picture taken with him. This afternoon, if the kid gets
called to her office, I don’t care what you do—take him to look at the
Declaration of Independence or the White House Christmas tree—
but do not let her pose near him.”
Tim nodded, but this whole tough-guy marching order sounded so
much like an imitation of Cohn imitating McCarthy that he had
trouble believing Jones could be fully serious.
Cohn himself continued shouting into the phone: “Listen, Adams.
You’re double-crossing me for the last time! You told me that Dave
would be assigned back to Manhattan after he’d finished his eight
weeks of basic. Yes, you did, goddammit! And now you go back on
your word and try to make him eat shit!” Pointlessly cupping the
receiver’s mouthpiece against his ever-rising volume, the
committee’s chief counsel declared: “If you don’t get Stevens to

straighten this out, Joe and I are going to wreck the goddamn army!
Yes, that’s exactly what I said, and it’s a promise!”
Further upset, Tim went over to the table with the travel vouchers,
amazed at the way Cohn and Jones seemed to think they could treat
the army, as if it were some crooked dry cleaner down the street.
After all, it was the army, with its million Private Garritys from
Augusta, that was actually killing Communists and being killed by
them. Still, Tim’s anger toward the two staffers couldn’t approach
what he was even now feeling for smirking Kenneth Woodforde, who
didn’t seem to think the reds ever killed anyone at all.
Tommy McIntyre approached Tim’s table in a grand mood. “It
seems that for all the ordure Private Schine’s been ingesting, he’s so
far had four weekend and five weeknight passes. Good thing he
wears a uniform. Otherwise he might not know he was in the army at
all.”
Tim was too agitated to remember who Private Schine even was.
Half the time he didn’t grasp what Tommy was saying, let alone who
really employed him and to what end. He didn’t know why
Woodforde should be one of the anti-anticommunists, as they were
now called, and he couldn’t be sure McCarthy, Cohn, and Jones
wouldn’t end up creating more of them. And he still could not
understand why, even with the New York strike, there hadn’t been
more press in the Caucus Room this morning. There was a war on,
for God’s sake, between good and evil, regardless of whether
Woodforde thought so, or even if he believed that each of those
values had been ascribed to the wrong side.
“Oh, god-fucking-dammit!” Tim heard his own voice flying out of
him when the heavy-duty stapler caught the tip of his thumb.
McIntyre and Mrs. Watt, the committee’s chief clerk, began to
laugh, mistaking his uncharcteristic profanity for exasperation over
some clerical error. Cohn, ranting through another phone call, didn’t

even turn his head. Dizzy with pain, Tim held his tongue against
further outburst; he wanted only for Hawkins to be here and to take
hold of him, the way he had when Tim had stubbed his toe one night
in the apartment on I Street.
“Jaysus,” said Tommy, realizing the actual situation. “You’re
bleeding, kid.”
“I’m okay.” But he wasn’t. He was a fool. Cowardly, and clumsy to
boot. I never heard one man ask for mercy. Out of that many men,
nobody cracked.
Mrs. Watt, also apologetic, now hovered over him.
“I’ll get him patched up,” said Tommy.
On their way to the nurse, his thumb wrapped in Tommy’s
handkerchief, Tim recognized Senator Hunt, the Wyoming Democrat
whose son had been convicted of sexual solicitation. Tommy
remained unusually quiet until the man passed and the two of them
reached the elevators. “Timothy,” he then asked, “have you got a
girlfriend?”
Annoyed by the pain in his hand, and now by this question, Tim
answered without suppressing the edge in his voice: “No, Mr.
McIntyre, I don’t.”
Tommy threw an arm over his shoulder. “Before the coming
shitstorm’s over, you may want to get yourself one.”

CHAPTER TEN

December 19, 1953
Thruston Morton wished Jerry Baumeister a Merry Christmas. He
shook his hand while propelling his own six-foot-two frame and pretty
wife, Belle, a few inches farther into Mary Johnson’s apartment. He
also patted the heads of Jerry’s two girls, who stood politely in red
velvet holiday skirts that their mother had made for them.
Watching from her kitchen, Mary took his skillful progress as
confirmation of the rumors that Mr. Morton did indeed want to get
back into elective politics with a Senate run from Kentucky in 1956.
The bureau chief did not look like a man who had lately received any
troubling phone calls, from Senator Fulbright or anybody else. He
certainly didn’t appear to know that the man he was greeting had
recently been discharged from his own department.
About thirty of the people Mary had invited were already here, and
it was warm enough for her to open the window. The place was
beginning to smell a little like the Maine Avenue wharf where she’d
gotten the crabs and cherrystone clams that Paul had helped her to
steam all afternoon—work he’d enjoyed much more than sitting with
her through the Mannes Trio at the Coolidge Auditorium Thursday
night.
What was it she’d come in here for? Napkins, that’s right. Okay,
now she had them and could rejoin both Paul and Beverly Phillips,
who’d arrived with some nice widower from the Social Security
Administration.
“He said he wanted to take me to the Shubert!” crowed Beverly,
who was in a fine mood. “I told him, ‘Hey, what do you take me for!’”

“I had to tell her they haven’t done burlesque in five years,” the
nice widower explained to Paul Hildebrand.
“See how far behind you get living out in the suburbs!” exclaimed
Beverly. “Gosh, Mary, this place is cute. And jammed!”
“Everyone who’s ever filled out a Form 57,” observed Paul.
“How does this poor man know about that!” cried Beverly. “Oh,
God, Mary, he’s not going to make you leave, is he?” Paul
Hildebrand’s dislike of politics and government had become a matter
of teasing and speculation among those who knew the progress of
Mary’s romance, and two bourbons had made Beverly even more
direct than usual.
“No,” said Mary. “I think Form 57 was mentioned in the monologue
Paul got a little while ago from that girl in International Materials.”
She pointed out a young lady across the room. “She was telling him
how well she hears women are doing at the FBI. Getting to be
everything but agents.”
Beverly’s widower seemed interested in pursuing the subject, but it
would have to be without Mary, who had just decided that she and
Paul, as if they really were married, should be circulating separately
through the party. Departing the conversation, she introduced one of
her old Q Street roommates to the little circle Paul would now be in
charge of. Betty Bowron, conspicuously tanned, had just been to
Miami with her boss for a Commerce Department conference, and
she seemed eager to talk about it.
Mary edged into another conversation. Her old friend Millie
Brisson, the congressman’s secretary, was talking about the suicide
of a young guard at the Tomb of the Unknown Soldier.
“Mysterious, no?” said Millie.

“Redundant, I’d say,” offered the young man Millie was talking to, a
Lousiana acquaintance of Mary’s who was up here trying to write a
kind of national version of All the King’s Men.
Mary checked the phonograph: the Christmasy Corelli concerto
had another two inches to go before she’d need to change the
record. But one of Jerry’s daughters, she now noticed, was
struggling with a hem that had fallen. Maybe the hard-drinking
mother had dropped a few stitches. “Honey,” called Mary, coming to
the rescue, “let me get you a little old safety pin.”
Inside her bedroom, while she rummaged the sewing box, Mary’s
glance was drawn through the window, to a scene made visible by
the streetlamp two houses down P Street. Hawkins Fuller, dressed
for her party and holding a small brown bag, stood talking to a
smaller man in a woollen cap and zippered jacket. She now
recognized him—the tortoiseshell glasses—as the boy who’d come
to the office with the book a couple of months back. He and Fuller
appeared to be saying goodbye. After giving Fuller a sweet, casual
punch on the arm, the boy smiled and walked away. At which point
her colleague turned around and started toward her apartment.
Mary wondered: Had that lovelorn little dogsbody leapt at the mere
chance to walk Fuller to a party the older man wouldn’t even let him
enter?
What exactly should she be feeling? Disgust? Sympathy? She
blocked the questions from her mind, and decided to use a needle
and thread, instead of a pin, on the Baumeister girl’s skirt. Picking
out a spool of bright red, she heard Corelli give way, abruptly, to
Eartha Kitt: Santa baby, hurry down the chimney to me…
Looking out into the living room, she saw Fuller at the turntable
and realized that he’d had a phonograph record inside the little
brown bag. People were beginning to cluster around him, just as
they would have had he only blown some dust off the needle and

dropped it back onto Corelli. An older man from European Affairs
was asking in a loud voice if he didn’t “think it terrible what had
happened to poor George Marshall over in Oslo. You were over
there once, weren’t you, young fellow? The poor general, heckled by
those Communists while picking up his Peace Prize!” Fuller agreed
that it was a shame, and moreover an embarrassment to old Haakon
VII, “a fine chap and top-drawer king.” Even as his always-adaptable
speech found him communicating in the EA man’s idiom, Fuller
began letting his own shoulders sway in a manner both slinky and
manly, one that belonged to nobody else at the party. Santa baby,
forgot to mention one little thing, a ring…
Mary watched him and nodded but didn’t smile. She proceeded to
Jerry’s daughter with her needle and thread.
Ten minutes passed before she again needed to be in the kitchen,
where she found Miss Lightfoot, middling drunk on Harvey’s Bristol
Cream and wearing a hideous hat. Mary had had to invite her, and
poor Mr. Church, an old friend from the Passport Office, was having
to listen to her.
“What do you mean by ‘this’?” asked Miss Lightfoot, who knew
perfectly well that Mr. Church had meant the sway of Senator
McCarthy when he told her that “this could all end if Senator Morse
just voted with the Democrats.” Should Oregon’s independent—
formerly a Republican—throw in with the other side when it came
time to organize the congressional session, then the chairmanship of
McCarthy’s committee, and much of his power, would pass to the
opposition.
“Well, Morse won’t vote with the Democrats. He’s already said so,”
Miss Lightfoot informed Mr. Church, whose more serious error had
been to assume, from the general tenor of those at Mary’s party, that
Miss Lightfoot, too, wanted all “this” to end. She did not. Nor,
actually, did the Democrats, she now argued. “They don’t want to

take over. They’d rather carp. Which is why they left the committee in
the first place.”
Mr. Church was shaking his head with forbearance, allowing Miss
Lightfoot to overprove her point, when Hawkins Fuller brushed past
them both. Leaning against the sink, Fuller took note of Mary’s
sleeveless black dress and declared: “That appears to be a very cold
shoulder.”
Miss Lightfoot, already keenly stimulated, and wishing for a sprig
of mistletoe under which to capture Fuller, tried to annex him to her
own conversation. “Mr. Fuller, tell Mr. Church here how you’ve got to
deal with the Democrats on Capitol Hill. Tell him how—”
Fuller ignored her ardent grasp of his forearm. He was interested
only in the lady of the house, who he realized had already had
enough to drink herself.
“You came alone?” Mary finally asked him.
“More or less,” he replied.
“How is a person ‘more or less’?” asked Mary. “Did you make that
poor creature I saw from the window walk all the way back home by
themselves?” Lit as she was, she took care to keep the pronouns
neutral, even at the expense of grammar, since she and Fuller now
had Miss Lightfoot’s complete attention, Mr. Church having beaten a
gentlemanly retreat once the handsome guest began having words
with the hostess. Fresh from political triumph, but still smarting from
Fuller’s rebuff, Miss Lightfoot now appeared determined at least to
savor victory over whatever hapless female Fuller had apparently
declined to bring up to the party.
Mary attempted to move out of the kitchen, but Fuller blocked her,
trying to smooth things over with a laugh. “If I’d brought him up, he
would only have asked you for a glass of milk. And you don’t seem
to be serving any.”

By now furious at being ignored, Miss Lightfoot could feel her
overpowdered jaw suddenly slacken. Him? He? A small cascade of
pennies started dropping in her head. After all her flirtation! She’d
even sung with this man! Without hesitation, she began a loud,
seething recitation of the words she’d seen that boy, that milkdrinking nancy, write in the Lodge biography: “‘With thanks to
Hawkins Fuller. I got the job. You’re wonderful.’” She made the
inscription sound as if it were a cable from Moscow that had been
discovered in Fuller’s shoe.
Mary, still unable to get away, could picture the book lying on
Fuller’s filing cabinet. He’d never even taken the gift home—a bit of
callousness that still appalled her, even as she wanted to defend
Fuller from this harridan to whom he’d so foolishly exposed himself.
Pushing Miss Lightfoot aside, she at last returned to the living room.
Fuller lifted the bottle of Harvey’s Bristol Cream from the kitchen
counter. He topped up Miss Lightfoot’s drink and poured one for
himself. He clinked her glass and said, “Miss Lightfoot, I am
wonderful.” And then, before walking away, he leaned over and
whispered in her ear: “So why don’t you just suffer.”

CHAPTER ELEVEN

December 23, 1953
At 6:05 a.m., the radio was saying that Cardinal Spellman, Catholic
vicar of the armed forces, had departed for Korea to say Christmas
Mass for the troops. On the Formica table near Tim’s bowl of cereal
lay the current issue of The Nation, which he’d been making himself
read last night. Kenneth Woodforde’s short sarcastic article on the
Potter hearings argued that the Hollywood Ten might now be making
a fine sentimental film about the forced march to Taejon if they hadn’t
been blacklisted from practicing their profession.
Since the atrocities testimony, Tim had more strongly than ever felt
himself part of a great moral battle, and more and more he wondered
how Hawkins, stationed at its international center, could exempt
himself from the fray with the handful of liberal nostrums and jokes
he uttered whenever Tim tried to draw him out on the subject. An
attempt to discuss his encounter with Woodforde, for example, had
resulted in Hawk’s telling him only to “stay away from reporters. They
dress worse than McCarthy.”
Tim opened a box containing the cheap necktie, monogrammed
with a huge, loud “F,” that he’d bought the other night on Fourteenth
Street. He would tell Hawk that the “F” stood for “Farouk,” not
“Fuller.” The deposed Egyptian king was back in the papers now that
his gaudy possessions were about to be auctioned off to help pay for
the Aswan Dam, and a sketch that Tim had gotten up early to finish
—of Hawk as a sultan surrounded by prostrate secretaries and
ambassadors, each peeling him a grape or fanning him with palms—
would go into the box with the tie. Tim drew well enough to have
once thought about going to art school, and he’d felt a wonderful

contentment while illustrating Hawk late last night, even if he’d had to
work from memory. (Would he ever possess a photograph?)
He planned to deliver the tie before Hawk left for work. He knew
he would be taking a risk by coming unannounced, and was certain
there would be no present for him in return. But he could not face the
trip home for Christmas without seeing Hawk once more.
There had been no question of buying a real gift. Any present that
seemed to express deep feelings instead of high spirits might invite
Hawk’s disapproval. As it was, once Tim boarded the bus to Foggy
Bottom, he worried about even this silly tie.
Traveling across the city, whose early commuter traffic was
moving mostly in the opposite direction, he calculated how much
time he had left to get to Hawkins’ apartment, give him the gift, and
then make it back to his own office on Capitol Hill. The time was
tighter than he would like, but even so, he got off the bus in Farragut
Square, in front of the Army and Navy Club, a few blocks from his
destination. He liked to approach the apartment on foot, to walk
down I Street savoring his own apprehension along with new details
of his beloved’s neighborhood. All too soon, he was there, at the
front door of the building, able to avoid the downstairs buzzer by
slipping in behind a meter man.
He had hoped to surprise Hawkins while he was still in bed, to find
him wearing striped pajama bottoms and no top. But instead he was
up, already in a shirt and tie. He’d been reading the paper at the
kitchen table and seemed neither angry nor startled to find company
at the door. Was there a chance he was pleased? He motioned Tim
in, pointing to a story in the paper. “Have you sent a Christmas card
home, Skippy? Even Guy Burgess has written his mother. From
where is unclear, but he’s let old Mum know he’s still alive.”
“I’ll be seeing mine when I get back to New York tomorrow.”

“I go up to Bar Harbor tonight. Not a safe harbor, either, with such
a large gathering of the paternal clan in the offing. Before New
Year’s everyone will be wishing they’d spent the week somewhere
warmer and with somebody else.” He pressed the trash container’s
little foot pedal and scraped the remains of his plate into the can. “I
should have arranged to go to Bermuda, with you.”
Tim was thrilled beyond measure. Anyone would have told him this
was only a pleasantry. But it’s the thought that counts, he heard
himself thinking.
Hawkins poured him some orange juice while glancing back at the
story on Burgess, the British spy.
Say you’ll miss me, thought Tim. All his thoughts were racing; all of
them were upping the ante. Finally, he leaned over and kissed him.
“Merry Christmas, Hawk. Here.” He handed him the gift.
Hawkins smiled at the box’s shape. “You may have noticed I
already have one of these on.” He sat down at the table. “Should I
open it now?”
“Later’s okay.” Tim suddenly didn’t care about the dangers of
rejection, about all the unspoken protocols and endless calculations
of risk. He climbed onto Hawk’s lap and began kissing his face and
neck with the desperate greed he always imagined the darkness hid.
“Hey, hey,” whispered Hawkins, making a token effort to push him
away. “My own juvenile delinquent. Careful you don’t wind up in that
Senate investigation.”
“That’s me,” said Tim, kissing him some more and loosening the
necktie that must have cost twenty times more than the one in the
box. “I’m your hoodlum, your little j.d.”
“Complete with switchblade,” said Hawkins, feeling Tim’s hard-on
through his Sanforized trousers.

In another minute they were on the bed, shirts off, pants open. Tim
forced himself to keep one eye on the clock, though his frantic ardor
ensured that things would be over quickly. His tongue was soon
moving along the thin line of hair that ran down Hawk’s stomach to
the waistband of his jockey shorts. As Tim sucked him, Hawkins
tousled his hair and softly moaned, not for the first time, “You’re the
best,” a phrase that always excited Tim, even if the competition it
implied was more disquieting than complimentary.
He wanted Hawk to climax in his mouth, but soon found himself
being lifted up, brought face-to-face with the man he loved, a man
who wanted to kiss him—as if aware that this was what he truly
needed to be soothed. With their tongues pressed together, he came
all over Hawkins’ stomach and chest.
The next kiss he received—for all the devastating tenderness of
the one before—could not have been more perfunctory. “Time and
tide,” said Hawkins, cheerfully, looking down at his own torso, from
which he’d gently displaced Tim. “And I do mean tide.” He got up to
get a towel.
Tim lay in the bed, scarcely daring to breathe. This last kiss had
put him back in his place, turned the ecstasy stale, and plunged him
into a welter of self-loathing. He watched Hawk towel off and
rebutton his shirt in front of the bathroom mirror. Knowing he’d soon
be crying, unless he held in the tears by force of will, he grabbed for
something on the night table. He wanted anything small that he
could squeeze in his hand to distract himself, the way one forgets a
pain in one place by introducing another somewhere else. He
realized what object he’d picked up—a pair of cuff links, hooked
together—only after he’d finished squeezing the metal as hard as he
could and opened his hand to have a look.
Hawkins returned to sit on the edge of the bed. “Put your shirt
back on,” he said.

Tim obeyed, while Hawkins went and got a pair of scissors that he
used to cut off the white buttons at Tim’s wrists. After making two
small slits to match the buttonholes, he proceeded to refasten the
sleeves with the cuff links he’d seen Tim squeezing.
The silence and the gestures seemed ritualistic. Were the cuff
links meant to be a return present, Hawk’s way of saying “I didn’t
have time to shop”? Should he be insulted? Either way, he wanted
them. They were proof, testimony to their union, a more elegant
exhibition of it than the bottle of milk Hawk had brought with him that
night to Capitol Hill, and which he’d never thrown away.
And yet—a horrible thought—what if the cuff links were someone
else’s? Left behind like that pair of galoshes? Tim could almost hear
the stranger and Hawk laughing, as the jewelry clinked onto the night
table just before some drunken dawn.
But then he saw the initials cut into the silver: HF.
Hawkins let go of his wrists and looked into his eyes. And then Tim
understood: these were his reward for not crying, for not making the
scene he’d been on the verge of making. He touched the cuff links,
trying to enjoy the feeling that he was branded, owned; trying to
appreciate the small bit of recklessness required of Hawk to give
them. Wearing them would entail a measure of daring, too: what
would he say if someone read the initials? His mind proceeded to
construct the sort of fast little lie that people like himself learned to
construct a dozen times a day. They’re not real silver. A Maryknoll
nun gave them to me when I made a donation. The “HF” stands for
“have faith.”
“I’m going to be late, Skippy.” Hawkins got up and walked to the
door, leaving him to show himself out.

Within fifteen minutes, Fuller was at the department. Inside
Congressional Relations, a bottle of Kentucky bourbon—a gift of the
bureau chief—sat atop each desk. On Mary Johnson’s blotter there
was also a tiny box, no bigger than two inches wide and high. A ring
from the brewer, Fuller supposed, as soon as he saw it.
“He snuck in here around eight-fifteen,” said Beverly Phillips. “An
odd way to propose, no? Maybe he wants us to be cheering her on,
telling her to accept.”
“And we’ll do just that,” said Fuller. “Won’t we, Miss Lightfoot?
Marriage being such a grand institution? Something everybody ought
to enjoy?”
Miss Lightfoot looked up from what she was typing to give him a
thin, defiant smile, as if signaling that she would have to bear his
presence here only a little while longer. Victory would be hers.
Fuller saw Mary enter the office, and he managed to halt her near
the front door. Walking her back out to the hall, he said: “You’ve got a
present on your desk from Mr. Right.”
“I’ve been expecting it,” she replied. She seemed calm, neither
displeased nor especially happy.
“You’re not going to let him take you away from all this, are you?”
She looked straight at Fuller. “Are we on speaking terms yet?”
They had exchanged hardly a word since the party on Saturday.
“You can decide that within the next hour,” said Fuller. “I’ll be out of
the office on a date with Mr. Right.”
Mary looked puzzled.
“McLeod. The real Mr. Right.”

“Oh, Fuller.”
He saw her sudden look of concern. Clearly they were speaking.
“The summons arrived yesterday,” he explained.
Revulsion crossed her face. “Miss Lightfoot?”
He nodded. “I’m due in Room M304. I’m sure your friend
Baumeister is familiar with it.”
“Does Mr. Morton know?” she asked.
“The boss is always the last to know. I don’t believe they tell him
until after they’ve told the wife. Their idea of fair play.”
An elevator ride and several hundred feet of waxed corridor
brought him to M304, the Bureau of Security and Consular Affairs,
whose name always sounded to Fuller like a CIA front: the little
publishing house in Vienna, the art dealer in Rome. The office he
entered had walls similar in color to those in his own, but there were
no partitions and, it appeared, no secretary. On a small table
between two chairs rested the department’s Investigative Manual
and several mimeographed copies of Scott McLeod’s August 8
speech to the American Legion in Topeka: “I have attempted very
frankly and honestly to face the issue of sexual perversion—the
practice of sodomy—in the State Department,” he had assured his
audience, promising the Legionnaires that in trying to replace those
discharged from federal service, he would be looking for men “wellgrounded in the moral principles which have made our democratic
republic a model form of government.”
“Mr. Fuller,” said a voice emerging from the wall intercom. “I’m
Fred Traband. Please step into Room M305. And please leave your
coat out there.”
Fuller entered the inner office and shook hands with Mr. Traband,
who immediately made it clear that there was nothing miscellaneous

about the Miscellaneous M Unit. “I’m the special agent in charge of
sexual-deviation investigations,” he said, as matter-of-factly as if he
were introducing himself as a budget analyst. “We believe we have
reason to ask you a series of questions,” he continued, without
actually giving the reason. Miss Lightfoot’s privacy, it seemed, must
be protected.
“Sit down, Mr. Fuller, and let me be frank. Eighty percent of these
sessions end with the admission of at least one proscribed behavior
by the interviewee.”
Fuller said nothing. He succeeded, without much effort, in looking
courteous, as if he were listening to a purser explain the exchange
rates for the next port of call.
“Security,” said Mr. Traband, “is endangered by more than covert
disloyalty, Mr. Fuller. The moral perversion and emotional immaturity
inherent in homosexual behavior make those who engage in it
targets of blackmail by anyone seeking to undermine the
government of the United States. Moreover, that same perversion
and immaturity are a danger to the homosexual’s fellow employees.
As I suspect you know, the Hoey Committee, whose investigation of
sodomy within the State Department led to the reconstitution of this
bureau, concluded that ‘one homosexual can pollute an entire
government office.’”
Fuller neither nodded nor shook his head, though Mr. Traband
looked as if he expected a flood of personal confession. When none
occurred, he made a request: “Mr. Fuller, please get up and walk
across the room.”
Fuller obliged and then returned to his seat.
“Again,” said Traband.
When Fuller had finished his second walk, Traband gave him a
newspaper and asked him to read a small story that he’d seemed to

pick at random.
Fuller recited: “‘President Eisenhower revealed in his State of the
Union message last January that he favors some form of home rule
for the District. The pres—’”
“Thank you, Mr. Fuller, that’s enough.” Traband passed an open
book across the desk. “This paragraph, please. The second-to-last
one on the page.”
Fuller picked up the book and looked at the spine—Of Human
Bondage—before he commenced reading aloud: “‘Philip opened a
large cupboard filled with dresses and, stepping in, took as many of
them as he could in his arms and buried his face in them. They smelt
of the scent his mother used. Then he pulled open the drawers, filled
with his mother’s things, and looked at them: there were lavender
bags among the linen, and their scent was fresh and pleasant. The
strangeness of—’”
“Enough,” said Traband, almost as if he could no longer bear the
voluptuous nonsense being inflicted on him.
Somerset Maugham? Fuller wondered. Was the interrogator
expected to detect a tribal affinity between author and reader? Was it
to be discerned in too much mimicry, a slightly excessive archness
or lyricism in the tone of the recitation? Just as, presumably, too light
a step in crossing the room might be added to his own too-expensive
clothes in the bill of fairy particulars being drawn up against him?
“Mr. Fuller, I’m going to ask you to take a lie-detector test.”
Fuller looked around but saw no machine. There was also no door
leading to any Room M306. There was, however, the kind of
curtained screen one found in a doctor’s office, and it turned out that
Traband’s assistant had been sitting behind it, beside an apparatus,
all along.

Fuller was instructed to open his shirt and roll up his right sleeve.
Once he did, the sensors were applied.
“Mr. Fuller,” asked Traband, “have you ever given or received
presents of a romantic nature to or from another man?”
With thanks to Hawkins Fuller. (I got the job. You’re wonderful.)
“No.”
“Have you ever frequented a Washington, D.C., establishment
called the Jewel Box, at the corner of Sixteenth and L streets?”
The tufted purple walls. The bartender who looks a little like Alan
Ladd. “No.”
“Have you ever been present at a Washington,
establishment called the Sand Bar, in Thomas Circle?”

D.C.,

The old redheaded queen leaning on the big plastic anchor at two
a.m., shouting to no one in particular. The piano player hammering
out “Some Enchanted Evening” for the third time in two hours. “No.”
Fuller looked at the blank far wall. Silently, he sang to himself:
You’re calmer than the seals in the Arctic Ocean. At least they flap
their fins to express emotion.
“Mr. Fuller, who was the president of the United States when you
were born?”
A “baseline” question. “Calvin Coolidge,” Fuller answered.
“Have you ever had inappropriate physical contact with a male
foreign national either in the United States or while abroad?”
Behind the bicycle shop in Oslo. Lars? Who had no undershirt
beneath his heavy fisherman’s sweater. “No.”

“Have you ever engaged in sodomy or oral-genital contact with
another male?”
He sometimes counted them like sheep. What was the name of
that Italian boy in San Diego? The night before we both shipped out.
The one who rubbed his feet together, fast, like a puppy having a
dream, when he came. And that same week, the one who claimed to
have gone to Annapolis, and tried—
“Mr. Fuller, answer the question.”
“No.”
“Have you ever considered yourself to be in love with another
male?”
Here, Fuller thought, was the first interesting query of the morning.
He pondered it, sincerely, dropping his gaze from the wall to his lap
and then his forearm, where, beneath the cuff of the machine’s main
sensor he noticed a golden-colored fleck of something dried onto his
skin: the tiniest bit of exuberant Tim, he realized, missed by the
towel. That’s me. I’m your hoodlum, your little j.d. He filled up with a
tender feeling, which he expelled, immediately, like a breath. “No,”
he answered.
Traband nodded to the machine operator, who tore off and labeled
a long piece of paper. “Mr. Fuller,” said the interrogator, “as soon as
the technician removes the sensors, you may return to your office
until you hear from us.”
Outside in Room M304, Fuller was confronted with the sight of
Scott McLeod himself, talking to whatever subordinate he’d brought
along. Picking up his suit jacket, Fuller wondered if he himself might
not be a bigger fish than he’d imagined. He nodded to the security
chief, whose plump pink complexion and translucent eyeglass
frames nodded back, before McLeod hastened himself and his
underling into the room Fuller had just exited.

McLeod’s chief patron, Senator Styles Bridges of New Hampshire,
had once, around 1940, during Fuller’s time at St. Paul’s, given a
speech to the students. Buttoning his jacket, Fuller could now recall
its title, printed on the program passed out in the chapel: “How to Be
a Man.”
Alone in Room M304, he took his time, combing his hair and
shooting his cuffs. He thought of Tim clutching the pair of links an
hour or so ago—and then he heard conversation begin to filter
through the cheap wartime-construction door separating Room M304
from Room M305. He walked back and put his ear to it.
“Clean?” asked an agitated voice he realized must be McLeod’s.
“As a whistle,” answered Traband.

PART TWO

FEBRUARY–NOVEMBER 1954
I am a strong believer in Purgatory.
—FLANNERY O’CONNOR

CHAPTER TWELVE

February 22, 1954
On George Washington’s Birthday the upper body’s only piece of
business—now being performed by Senator Hunt before a handful of
colleagues and a full gallery of holiday tourists—was a recitation of
the first president’s Farewell Address. Representative Metcalf of
Montana was doing the honors in the House. According to Tommy
McIntyre, the old-timers there could still remember the February
tributes to Lincoln being conducted by Henry Rathbone, Republican
of Illinois, son of the unfortunate fellow who’d been beside the
president and knifed by Booth in the box at Ford’s.
Tim couldn’t imagine ever being an old-timer on the Hill, but after
four months he no longer needed the Congressional Directory to
recognize who came and went on the floor. He’d been able to pick
out Hubert Humphrey, plump and happy and fast, as well as Senator
Green of Rhode Island, frail and dusted with dandruff and said to be,
like Speaker Rayburn and Senator Russell, “a lifelong bachelor.”
Senator Hunt was doing his best, but very laboriously, with
Washington’s 150-year-old oratory. It was hard for Tim to believe,
even as he tried peeling away the decades with his imagination, that
this rumpled and tired-looking man, stolidly fixed to the carpet, had
once played semipro baseball. Kenneth Woodforde could probably
make some clever irony out of the way Hunt had spent much of his
adult life, after baseball and before politics, as a dentist. It was, after
all, another dentist bringing the Capitol to a boil right now. The
building was ready to blow over the way General Ralph Zwicker had
been questioned by the McCarthy committee in New York last
Thursday about the promotion of Major Irving Peress, D.D.S. and
onetime Communist.

It seemed obvious to everybody including Tim that Peress had
gotten an extra stripe merely through the routine, unstoppable flow of
army paper, with whoever had been in charge no more likely to
notice the major’s politics than to spot a pebble inside a glacier. And
yet, for being in command at Camp Kilmer when the promotion
occurred, General Zwicker had received an absolutely livid thrashing
from McCarthy. The record of the hearing had been leaked in several
places on the Hill and would no doubt be in the papers tomorrow.
It was hard concentrating on George Washington’s rhetorical ghost
while holding this incendiary onionskin transcript that Tommy had
asked him to read. It had been typed over the weekend by Miss
Cook, who’d called everybody in to the office this morning. (Tim
could now get telephone messages through the hardware store
below his apartment.) He’d intended to spend lunchtime on the
banks of the Potomac, where, to mark the holiday, contestants in a
model-plane competition would be flying tiny craft weighted with
silver dollars across the river; but by 8:45 Tommy had been greeting
him at the door to Room 80, informing him that they’d have to spend
the day “telling Charlie what to think of all this business with the
brass.”

SEN. McCARTHY: Don’t be coy with me, General.
GENERAL ZWICKER: I am not being coy, sir.

Each translucent page was more startling than the one before. Lest
Tim miss anything, Tommy had circled the worst bits with a laundry
marker:

GENERAL ZWICKER: I don’t like to have anyone impugn my

honesty, which you just about did.
SEN. McCARTHY: Either your honesty or your intelligence; I can’t

help impugning one or the other…

SEN. McCARTHY: I mean exactly what I asked you, General,

nothing else. And anyone with the brains of a five-year-old
child can understand that question.
SEN. McCARTHY: Any man who has been given the honor of

being promoted to general and who says, “I will protect
another general who protected Communists,” is not fit to wear
that uniform, General. I think it is a tremendous disgrace to
the Army to have this sort of thing given to the public. I intend
to give it to them.

On Friday afternoon, Zwicker, who’d stormed Omaha Beach on DDay, had told reporters that McCarthy had treated him worse than
he’d treated the actual Communist who’d been in the witness chair a
few minutes earlier. Secretary of the Army Stevens, upon learning of
the chairman’s tirades, had told the general not to show up for the
public testimony he was supposed to give tomorrow in Washington.
Stevens would come to the Capitol and answer McCarthy himself.
The army and the subcommittee were now, indisputably, at war.
Roy Cohn had returned Stevens’ fire, pronouncing “the army’s
attempt to coddle and promote Communists” too important for good
manners from the subcommittee. His own part in the assault on
Zwicker could also be found in the transcript, where Tim spotted
Jones, too, charging in like a battle-crazed bugle boy. For the past

couple of months there had been amused talk in the office about
how the ambitious research assistant was beginning to acquire
McCarthy’s oral cadences and repetitions, those reiterated opening
phrases that turned the senator’s questions into little battering rams
of sound.
“‘The nation which indulges toward another an habitual hatred or
an habitual fondness is in some degree a slave,’” Senator Hunt
continued, to the gallery’s ever-decreasing attention. What might
Woodforde make of that? Tim wondered. The Zwicker transcript was
starting to upset him as much as Woodforde and Cohn had after the
atrocities hearing. But even so, the larger, implacable fact remained:
we ought to hate Russia, where people were slaves. China, too: the
House had just gotten intelligence estimates that Mao Tse-tung had
murdered more than fifteen million people. How differently, knowing
of such mass slaughters, might George Washington be speaking
today?
The conflict between sordid means and great ends had been
gnawing at Tim—it was a kind of religious mystery beyond his
powers of reckoning—and when it came to Hawkins Fuller, the last
two months had been grindingly devotional. Tim realized he was
practicing a kind of Trappist discipline that left him alternately exalted
and exhausted. At Grandma Gaffney’s on Christmas Day he’d felt
the same isolation he’d experienced at Thanksgiving—only it had
been twice as strong, a physical ache that stole his appetite and left
him unable to concentrate on anything but endless, repetitive
thoughts of his beloved. He had kept himself from sending a
postcard to the Fullers’ address in Maine, mailing one instead,
pointlessly, to the empty apartment on I Street, which he’d walked
past three times after returning to Washington early. He had tried to
content himself with the awareness that this small, falsely cheerful
expression of himself was sleeping in the mailbox of #5B, beside
some unopened bills awaiting the still-absent tenant. He had finally
gone to dinner at Duke Zeibert’s with Bobby Garahan, his Fordham
pal—God, Laughlin, it’s steak; how come you’re just picking at it?—

but he’d returned home early to read a library copy of the Lodge
biography. He still wondered where Fuller’s inscribed one resided. At
the office? In some jumbled corner of the apartment he’d never
caught sight of?
Once Hawk finally came back to town, all had gone as it had in the
fall, with a sort of unnerving joy, the possibility of banishment
hovering over everything, more like a rival than a fate, a presence
that seemed to listen in on the telephone and slip into bed between
the two of them. Now, three weeks into February, Hawk had
suddenly gotten busy at work. His preoccupation there was actually
proving a relief to Tim: if Hawk had less time for him, there had to be
less for any others as well.
A vote on the Bricker Amendment was fast approaching, with
Hawk actually due to call on Potter later this week to explain the
administration’s opposition. “I’ll make myself scarce when you get to
the office,” Tim had assured him. Hawk, seeing the embarrassment
Tim was anticipating, had only laughed. “Skippy,” he’d replied,
squeezing the back of Tim’s neck, “don’t ever play poker.” More
seriously, he’d added: “Make yourself stick around when I arrive. It’s
good training.”
“For what?” Tim had asked.
“For the life you’ll be leading.”
A life together? He had, for a moment, allowed himself to believe
that that was what Hawk meant, though he soon realized that he
meant the life Tim would be living once he’d been sent, schooled in
doubleness, on his way.
All at once, Tommy McIntyre was in the galley, standing over Tim.
The gleam in his eye would have made anyone guess he’d gone
back to drinking—“the affliction of our people,” he often told Tim in
alluding to the problems of his past. But, along with a clipboard,
Tommy’s right hand held only an unopened bottle of 7Up.

“You’re needed,” he said. “Badly.”
“I’m sorry,” Tim replied, quickly gathering up the loose sheets of
transcript.
Tommy flung his arm over Tim’s shoulder. “There’s nothing to be
sorry about today, Mr. Laughlin.” The gleam in the eye, Tim could
see, bespoke an almost martial excitement. Tommy whistled while
the two of them marched back to Room 80, which bustled with
enterprise. Even Mrs. Potter was on hand, oblivious to the real
drama and driving Miss Cook crazy with a display of the floral hat
she’d bought to wear at Thursday’s congressional wives’ luncheon
for Mamie Eisenhower and Mrs. Nixon. Everyone else in the office
had already been made to inspect the hat; Senator Potter looked
relieved to see McIntyre and Laughlin reappear.
“Here’s the drill,” said Tommy to the senator and Tim, as if both
occupied the same rung on the staff. “The hearing with Stevens has
been postponed until Thursday. And our Democratic friends have
decided to come back to the committee.” Potter seemed as much
taken aback by this as Tim, who was now told why he’d been
fetched. “All right, my boy,” said Tommy. “Sit yourself down and
compose a nice noble statement for our friends in the press about
why we’ve just fired your colleague Mr. Jones.”
Tim turned quickly to Senator Potter, who looked down, abashed,
at his own artificially filled shoes. “I’m afraid,” the lawmaker said,
“that on Friday, without any authorization, Bob put out a statement in
my name. It was just like Cohn’s, all about how the treatment of
General Zwicker was justified by the gravity of the matter under
investigation. Apparently a couple of papers up in Maine, Bob’s
home state, went and ran it. I just can’t have that.”
“Nor,” said Tommy, “can the senator have Mr. Jones engaging in
impersonation at the hearings themselves. I’ve just shown him a
couple of transcripts from last fall.”

“I wish I’d known before,” said Potter, who still seemed more
perplexed than outraged.
“Well, Senator, better late than never. Don’t you agree, Timothy?”
Earlier, thought Tim, would surely have been better still. Why, he
wondered, had Tommy months ago shown him, but not Potter, the
transcripts that had Jones playing senator along with Cohn and
Schine?
“Bring the statement ’round to me at the Press Club an hour from
now,” instructed Tommy.
And why, Tim wondered, wasn’t Tommy himself handling this
crucial and clearly relished piece of business? Only, it seemed,
because he had too much to do. From the way he proceeded to
direct the senator back to his own desk, it appeared evident that
Thomas McIntyre—this Johnny-on-the-spot, this come-and-go fixer
—was now everybody’s boss, Potter’s included.

Fuller, too, had been called into the office this morning, no matter the
holiday. Dulles, just back from Berlin, had scheduled a conference
for congressional leaders. It was going on right now, and its
participants included South Dakota’s Senator Mundt, second to
McCarthy on the subcommittee, who in the course of a lobbying
session against the Bricker bill just the other day had demonstrated
no real interest in talking to Fuller about the legislation.
“He preferred to squawk about all the commotion Marilyn Monroe’s
been allowed to cause in front of our boys in Korea,” Fuller now
explained to Mary. “It seems the army is in hot water it doesn’t even
know about.”
“Diamonds should be this girl’s best friend,” said Mary, still cross
about having had to come in today.

“You’ve got a diamond.” Fuller pointed to the modest ring from
Paul Hildebrand, whose stone Mary now twisted around to the
hidden side of her finger.
“Is that or is it not an engagement ring?” asked Fuller.
Both realized that he had just fallen into mimicry of the Christmasweek interrogration they’d never talked about once it was over.
“The rumor is you passed their lie-detector test,” said Mary.
“Yes, and I haven’t yet had my raise.”
“How’s your French, Fuller?”
“Not as good as it would be if I’d had nuns teaching it to me in
New Orleans.”
“Do you know
recklessness?”

the

difference

between

sang-froid

and

“Yeah, that I grasp.”
“No, you don’t. Sang-froid is what you must have shown in front of
the machine. In here you’ve just been reckless.”
Fuller leaned back in his chair, daring her to elaborate.
“The ever-more-frequent personal phone calls. The louder
laughter whenever you take them. The ever-shorter hours. It all adds
up to a certain triumphalism. Dangerous, I’d say.”
“Is she not gone from our midst?” asked Fuller, palms upward.
“Yes, she is.” Another rumor had it that, before her disappearance
into the Operations office, Miss Lightfoot had tried and failed to get
herself transferred to McLeod’s domain. But the handing over of

Fuller had proved a poor audition for any job in the Miscellaneous M
Unit.
“Well, there you go,” said Fuller.
“Our real triumph is supposed to be over Senator Bricker,” said
Mary, as politely as she could. “I’m not sure that Mr. Morton’s
patience will last forever.”
“I guarantee you that I’ll fail upward. Even if every now and then I
have to hide behind your old New Look skirts.”
“So it’s mothering you want from me?” She was embarrassed
once she asked the question—it sounded as if she were fishing for
some surprise romantic answer—and she did her best to withdraw it.
“You still have a mother. Which is more than I can say for myself.”
“I have a father, too.”
“Are they happy together? Mother and father.”
“You’ve got to be kidding,” said Fuller.
“Why shouldn’t they be? Mine were.”
“The corridors at Park and Seventy-fourth are just as quiet, and
nearly as long, as the ones we have here. Mother was more or less
within shouting distance of my room, to the north. Father was around
the corner and far to the south.”
“A sister,” said Mary, trying for lightness. “That’s what you need.”
“I have two of them. A surfeit, Miss Johnson.”
“I’m making you angry. I should go.”
“You’re making me angry. I should go.”

“I shouldn’t pry.”
“As if that were the reason you anger me!” said Fuller, with a
laugh.
She suspected the real cause of his anger was his not wanting her
to be a mother or a sister. A part of him—the part that hated what he
was; even he couldn’t be without that—must also hate her, for the
way she got under his skin, ever so slightly, while remaining, finally,
irrelevant. He wasn’t angry because she knew his secrets; he was
angry because she couldn’t be the way out of them. Hadn’t he
looked at her, now and then, with a moment’s real interest? An
interest that quickly curdled into something like contempt—for
himself, for her, for his inability to follow through? She doubted she
would ever tell him her own secrets, not when some part of him
might take an oblique pleasure in betraying them.
He got up from his chair, a folder in hand, and began to exit the
office.
“Are you mad at me now?” she asked.
“Now and forever,” he replied, with a tenderness that made the
answer no less true.

Not a good day for the mimeograph machine to be on the fritz! But it
was, and so once Tim cut the stencil announcing Jones’s
termination, he had to trot it over to the office of Senator Goldwater,
another GOP freshman and World War II veteran, whose secretary
would be happy to run it off. Eager for some air, he took the outdoor
route, and on the sidewalk in front of the SOB came upon a cluster
of photographers. They were shouting like the crowd he
remembered outside McCarthy’s wedding.
“How about giving her a kiss, Joe?” “How about signing the cast?”

“I’ve already signed it,” said McCarthy, who grinned as he pointed
to the plaster enclosing one of Jean McCarthy’s shapely legs. She’d
broken it in a taxi accident in New York, the night before the Zwicker
hearing. Joe hadn’t been injured, but his wife had spent a couple of
nights by her lonesome in Flower Hill Hospital. McCarthy had just
gone to Union Station to meet the train bearing his injured bride from
New York. If ever there was a day when he could use a picture full of
pulchritude and warmth, this was it. Jean flashed her beauty-queen
smile and the cameras went in for tight shots that cut out the
plainclothes policemen whose sidearms bulged beneath their coats.
Amidst this Hollywood clamor, Tim suddenly locked eyes with
Robert Jones, who looked like a man just given his dream job, not
one who’d just been fired. Jones smiled broadly at the lensmen,
hoping to interest one of the cameras in himself. Tim made his way
into the building without their exchanging even a nod.
A half-hour later he was down on Fourteenth Street, entering the
Press Club with a hundred copies of the firing announcement under
his arm. The first one went to Tommy, eating peanuts at the bar, and
the second to May Craig, who sat beside him. Each already had
another press release—not as neatly typed as Tim’s—resting on the
bar beside their drinks. Tommy picked up that sheet, damp with
ginger ale, and gave it to Tim to read.
JONES DECLARES SENATE CANDIDACY

Robert L. Jones of Biddeford, Maine, former legislative assistant
to Sen. Charles Potter (R-Mich.), announced this afternoon that
he would challenge Maine senator Margaret Chase Smith in this
June’s Republican primary. Citing Sen. Smith’s “shameful
reluctance to face the Communist menace for what it is…”
“Running for office!” cried Tim. “Where will he get the money for
that?” He recalled the peanut-butter-and-jelly sandwiches that

Jones’s wife sent him to work with.
“Wait till you see what Joe McCarthy’s Texas supporters pony up!”
cawed Miss Craig. “Jones’ll be riding around Bangor in a red
Cadillac all his own! Even so, it’s only because the liar got canned.
So in the meantime,” she said, lifting her glass in a toast to McIntyre:
“To the man who chopped down that miserable little cherry tree!”
“I cannot tell a lie,” said Tommy. “’Twas I.” The gleam in his eye
thanked Miss Craig, but behind its excitement, much farther back,
Tim thought he could see the look of a man who knew he had
entered a dark and perilous grove.

CHAPTER THIRTEEN

March 3, 1954
“Ah, seems Skippy fell into the coalpile in Grandma Gaffney’s
basement.”
Tim stood, puzzled, at the doorway to the Bureau of Congressional
Relations. His Ash Wednesday had begun so early, near the crack of
dawn at St. Peter’s on Second Street, that he’d forgotten the priest’s
black thumbprint on his forehead. Now he remembered.
“And to dust I shall return,” he told Fuller.
“Come inside,” said the older man, guiding him between the
desks. “Meet our ambassadresses to that foreign country where you
reside. I refer, of course, to Capitol Hill. Timothy Laughlin, this is Mrs.
Phillips, my right arm, and here is Miss Johnson, increasingly our left
wing.” Fuller completed the roster with a reference to their Kentucky
boss: “The colonel, I’m afraid, is nowhere to be found.”
“Well,” said Beverly Phillips, “I’ve got to go find him. Excuse me,
all.” On her way out, she smiled at Tim, whose October visit to the
office she did not recall.
He knew that even mild political joking was proscribed at State,
but Hawk had told him how the atmosphere in the office had become
much merrier since a woman named Miss Lightfoot had gotten
herself transferred to the Operations office. In fact, as he went to
take a phone call, Hawk told him to sit at the desk that was still
awaiting her replacement. Before disappearing, he took from Tim the
manila envelope that was the reason for this visit.

“It’s nice to see you again,” said Mary. “You’re the young man who
brought Mr. Fuller a book sometime back.”
Tim nodded, nervousness subsumed into pleasure over how this
memory of hers certified that he had a history with Hawkins, that he
was situated within his life. There was also something thrilling about
the term “Mr. Fuller.”
“Right,” said Tim. “Yesterday he left some papers at—on the Hill.”
Within the limits of the adjusted preposition, this was not a lie.
Fuller had forgotten the envelope in Tim’s apartment early last
evening, when he’d come around after some late appointments in
the House Office Building. Tim had meant to return the papers
tonight, but Fuller had called Senator Potter’s office an hour ago to
say he needed them now.
“Did you at least manage a Mardi Gras celebration last night?”
Mary pointed to the ashes on his forehead. “I should explain I’m from
New Orleans.”
“Oh, I know,” said Tim, who feared, as soon as he said it, that he’d
said too much. But Miss Johnson was smiling at him, and he felt
suffused with a sense of safety. He forgot about his desire to see
around the doorway and into Hawkins’ office, where he’d worried
about finding the Lodge biography, uncherished, lying atop a filing
cabinet or beside a dying plant.
“We’re usually a bit more busy here,” said Mary. The defeat of the
Bricker Amendment the other day—owed in part to the theatrics of
Lyndon Johnson, who’d brought Senator Kilgore in on a stretcher to
cast the deciding vote—had been a rare piece of good news. And it
had been followed by another, when Secretary Dulles unexpectedly
relieved Scott McLeod of his personnel duties, confining him
henceforth to security matters—an amazing, tacit declaration that the
two operations were not locked together in eternal emergency.
McCarthy had complained about McLeod’s diminution, but he had

too many other fish frying—everyone could see something big
coming—to say very much.
“It’s nice,” said Tim. “The calm, I mean. It’s anything but calm
where I am.”
“He’s right,” said Fuller, emerging from his office. “These days poor
Mr. Laughlin is even dodging bullets.”
“You weren’t near the shootings, were you?” asked Mary.
“No,” said Tim. “I’m on the Senate side. But I was at the hospital
this morning. My boss, Senator Potter, went to see Congressman
Bentley. They’re both from Michigan, and I came along for the ride.”
It had been an odd delegation that went to Walter Reed to see
Bentley, who’d been wounded by the Puerto Rican nationalists firing
from the House gallery. Tim had shared the car with Potter and his
one-armed driver and Tommy McIntyre, whose eyes had remained,
for the past ten days, continually ablaze. As near as Tim could tell,
he’d been asked along because Tommy liked having an audience for
all sorts of indiscreet chatter about the committee’s impending
showdown with the army. The confrontation would either break
McCarthy—as Tommy tended to believe one day—or render him
omnipotent, as he generally feared the next. Either way, for as long
as it went on, Tommy insisted, Potter would have to be manipulated
into doing the right, maybe even pivotal, thing. Robert Jones’s
campaign against Margaret Chase Smith—a small, distant theater of
a much bigger war—was already another arena for Tommy’s
attempts at subversion. Cash was being mailed, phone calls getting
made.
These were the sorts of things Tim told Hawkins on nights they
were together, eliciting laughter at naïve points in the telling.
“Has McCarthy still got his guards?” Mary asked Tim.

“Plainclothes, I think. You wouldn’t believe some of the mail
Senator Potter gets, just from sitting at the same table with
McCarthy. Which isn’t really fair,” he said, lowering his eyes toward
Miss Lightfoot’s old blotter, not truly confident of what he was saying.
“The Communists are the real issue, and—”
Fuller cut him off: “I wouldn’t open any packages that arrive, even
after all this is over.”
Tim, not sure if he was being teased or protected, said nothing,
while Mary Johnson pictured this boy opening a parcel with his small
scrubbed fingers and getting blown to bits. His destruction was, she
thought, going to occur in any case. She watched him watching
Fuller, his face like a paper target on a firing range.
“The rumor,” said Tim, “is that John Adams, the army’s lawyer, has
a diary that lists all the pressures McCarthy and Cohn applied to get
special treatment for David Schine. People also say McCarthy’s own
staff has been coming back to the office late at night to cook up
documents that will refute the diary.”
He spoke the last sentence as if refusing to believe it.
“My boss,” Tim continued, meaning McIntyre, “had me go over
there the other night and look around.” He blushed at the admission.
“I didn’t really see much through the frosted glass of the door.”
“All right, Mr. Laughlin.” Fuller rose from the edge of the desktop.
“We can’t waste the taxpayers’ money by keeping you here any
longer.” The dismissal was performed as a burlesque of impatience,
but Tim knew he was indeed meant to go, as if the two of them really
were Mr. Fuller and Mr. Laughlin, strangers. The touch of Hawkins’
hand to his shoulder, for the briefest moment as they reached the
door, did little to erase the impression.
“He’s a nice boy,” said Mary Johnson, once he was gone.

“Skippy?” asked Fuller. “Practically an angel.”
She resumed typing thank-you letters to opponents of the Bricker
Amendment.
“You don’t approve,” said Fuller, not quite ready to reenter his own
office.
“Of what?” asked Mary.
The ensuing silence convinced her he didn’t really mean to
discuss it. “Fuller,” she finally said—a last effort—“I’m not Miss
Lightfoot.”
“I’ll tell the brewer. He’ll be relieved.”
“But no,” said Mary. “I suppose I don’t approve. I doubt any woman
really does. And you can’t expect me to: I was still getting ashes on
my own head three years ago. But there are things I approve of
less.”
“Of our boy Skippy railing against the reds?”
“No. Of your breaking his heart.”
Fuller paused before saying, grandly, “I lack all such intention.”
“But not all such power.”
They were both still afraid of this conversation, and knowing that
Fuller could outlast her in any duel of silences, Mary got up to file a
handful of Bricker clippings from the European press.
“I suppose,” she said at last, “Tim was imagining how he’d like to
sit at that desk every day, be at your beck and call.” She nodded to
Miss Lightfoot’s empty station.

“He’d be excellent,” replied Fuller. “Works very hard, and has his
race’s gift of gab when he’s working on paper. The stammer
disappears then, just as it does when he’s drunk or—I’m sure—
angry, though that I’ve never seen. His handwriting is even neater
than Miss Lightfoot’s.”
“Oh, you’d see him angry if he worked at that desk.” Mary kept
filing as she spoke. “How do you think he’d feel taking your calls, and
hearing your conversations?”
Fuller said nothing, but still would not go back inside his office.
Mary knew that he wanted to make her work even harder at this,
force her to stick the knife farther in, get her—where McLeod had
failed—to make the needle jump.
“Wouldn’t sooner rather than later hurt him less?” she asked.
“Couldn’t you let him down easily? Give him up for Lent?”
Fuller pushed his hair above his forehead, making his ashless,
marble brow fully visible. He returned to his office, declaring curtly,
“I’m not Catholic, Miss Johnson.”

CHAPTER FOURTEEN

March 10, 1954
“You’re not coming in?” Senator Potter asked Tommy McIntyre at the
threshold to McCarthy’s inner office in the SOB.
“No,” said Tommy. “I’ll let Mr. Laughlin go in with you to make a
record.”
Surprised as he was by Tommy’s directive, Tim was soon even
more startled to feel the hard, friendly clap of Joe McCarthy’s hand
on his shoulder. The chairman didn’t seem to mind his presence,
taking him, perhaps, for an unpaid gopher, maybe even a page.
There was nothing to do but go in and, after taking charge of Potter’s
canes, sit down on a beat-up horsehair sofa, a few deferential feet
from the two senators.
“Now, Charlie,” said the chairman. “I hope you haven’t let Egghead
R. Murrow scare you off from all the work we’ve still got to do
together.” McCarthy ran his tongue over his top front teeth, and
smiled as he awaited a reply.
“I didn’t see the program,” said Potter.
Tim had watched it on Hawkins’ television. The half-hour episode
of See It Now had been unrelenting, even brutal, but Hawk had fallen
asleep before Murrow closed with an ominous quotation from Julius
Caesar.
“I gather the fellow doesn’t like me,” said the chairman, flashing
another smile and twirling his big horn-rimmed glasses above the
blotter. McCarthy was nervous, Tim realized, though only for
moments at a time. At the doorway, when he realized he’d hit Tim’s

shoulder far too hard, a look of tenderness had crossed his face and
then instantly vanished, been left for dead in the space of a second.
“Well,” said Potter, who sat in a chair beside the desk, “my old aide
Jones is throwing you plenty of bouquets up in Maine. ‘A great
American, a great patriot, doing a great job.’” He tried smiling, but
couldn’t manage it; there wasn’t enough mischief in him.
McCarthy, however, roared with laughter. “You never should have
let him go, Charlie! I’m not sure I could get even Roy to put it so
well.”
“Jones has also been saying some things, not so flattering, about
Margaret Smith,” added Potter, just above a mumble. “‘A nice lady
but for her left-wing ideas.’ Stuff like that.”
McCarthy shrugged, but Potter managed to warm to the topic of
Jones, even if it wasn’t the subject he’d come in with. “In his
speeches up there, Bob now talks about having been a ‘member of
the committee.’”
McCarthy again laughed things off. “There’s a go-getter! You
should have kept him and given him a raise!”
“He seems to be doing pretty well up there for a guy who’s no
longer pulling in the eighty-five hundred a year I used to pay him.”
“He hasn’t gotten a dime from me, Charlie.”
The smile was gone, and the “m” in “dime” came out as a
prolonged, electrical buzz, the way McCarthy would have sent it
through a radio microphone.
“Joe, I got a report last night from across the river.”
There was no need to explain further. Everyone had been hearing
rumors of the “Adams chronology,” a timeline prepared at the

Pentagon by the army counsel, detailing all the pressures exerted on
Schine’s behalf by McCarthy and Cohn.
“That prick Nixon wouldn’t be behind this, would he?” When it
came to exposing Communists, McCarthy liked to call the veep a
Johnny-leave-early, an ambitious young man who’d traded his onceraucous sound truck for the smooth sedan of Eisenhower
moderation, a vehicle he now thought he could ride to 1600
Pennsylvania Avenue.
“No, Joe,” continued Potter, as sternly as he could. “I got this
report from Wilson. He sent it to me himself.”
Surely, Tim thought, even Potter knew that the secretary of
defense had not dispatched this dynamite without a direct order from
the White House.
McCarthy tried to stare down his interlocutor, but Potter managed
to continue: “I’m disturbed by what I see in it.” He sounded like the
social worker he’d once been, regretfully forced to confront a relief
recipient with reports of misbehavior.
The senator from Wisconsin would have none of it: “Charlie, you
and I and the rest of the committee need to get back to finding
Communists. We should be getting Scott McLeod the rest of his job
back.” The “Ms” and the “Ns” were buzzing.
“Joe,” said Potter, delivering the line he must have rehearsed the
hardest, “Roy Cohn needs to be fired.”
Tim recalled the look on Cohn’s face when the committee counsel
had been on the phone screaming to John Adams about Dave
Schine’s having to “eat shit” in basic training. Had that remark gotten
typed into the “Adams chronology,” which Potter was nervously
rolling and unrolling in his hands? Tim had no more than a second to
ponder the question; the room’s sudden, inescapable drama was the

hurricane sweeping McCarthy’s face, stirring up the expression that
must have greeted General Zwicker a few minutes into his testimony.
“Senator Potter, believe it or not, I have some friends among the
press. Men like Winchell and George Sokolsky. Jews. Strong, rightthinking Jews who have a clear sense of what communism actually
is. They’re a minority among their own people, from whom they take
considerable abuse. They won’t be pleased to see you and your
friends go after Roy, who’s the youngest and the finest and the
strongest of this minority within a minority. Winchell has a
microphone, Senator. And Sokolsky has a thousand of Hearst’s
printing presses. Go after Roy Cohn and they’ll go after you,
Senator. In fact, I’ll make sure they do.”
Tim gripped both of Potter’s canes as if they might actually be
needed to beat McCarthy back. And yet he could hear that the
secretary sitting outside next to Tommy had not so much as
interrupted her typing in response to the boss’s bellow. She seemed
to realize that the fierce-sounding storm would actually be a quick
shower, not worth opening an umbrella for.
But McCarthy was not quite through. “Everybody’s money comes
from someplace, Senator. Even yours. Everybody’s people come
from someplace.” McCarthy indicated the outer office with a raise of
his chin. Was Tommy, Tim suddenly wondered, a former
Communist? He looked toward Potter for some confirmation of the
possibility. The senator did not respond. His courage, Tim realized,
was of a purely physical kind; when Potter looked into the boiling
face of his colleague, he appeared calmer than when he merely
glanced at the carpet.
Then the sun broke through. McCarthy relaxed his chin and
smiled. He shook his head. “Oh, hell, Charlie. I don’t give a damn
about Schine. He’s just a dumb, good-looking kid hoping to get laid
even more than he already does. I think he figures coming home
with a few scalps and a few headlines will accomplish whatever his

face and his old man’s money can’t.” Potter said nothing, not even
when one last cloud scudded across the chairman’s face. “But Roy
worries about him,” said McCarthy. “And I’m not going to get rid of
Roy.”
What, Tim wondered—trying to think like Tommy—did Cohn have
on McCarthy? It couldn’t just be, as McCarthy was now saying, that
“the Communists would take more comfort from Roy’s being fired
than they have from anything since Roosevelt recognized Russia
twenty years ago.” Nobody, thought Tim, not even Cohn, could be
that smart or indispensable. Everybody said Bob Kennedy would
have done just as well, been just as ferocious, if McCarthy had given
him the counsel’s job. Joe Kennedy had wanted it for his son, but
McCarthy, who’d even dated one of Kennedy’s daughters, had
feared being tainted with the old ambassador’s anti-Semitism,
something he couldn’t afford when the committee was investigating
so many Jews. And so the job had gone to Cohn.
“Have a drink, Charlie.”
The chairman, smiling again, now appeared to take Potter’s
silence for consent. It was settled; Roy would stay. And since the
bottles in the glass-doored bookcase were all the way across the
room, McCarthy reached a few easy inches for his briefcase,
unsnapping its metal tabs and taking out a fifth of Jim Beam. He
looked at Tim and laughed: “Are you old enough, son?” The “n”
didn’t buzz. McCarthy may already have had a liquid lunch, but he
was fully himself—playing to the room, not the radio. Tim smiled and
shook his head, declining as politely as he could, while wondering if
Tommy’s hatred of McCarthy might not spring from this alone, the
drinking, the loathing a reformed drunk has for an active one. No,
Tim decided, it wasn’t enough of an explanation, any more than
Cohn’s talent for fighting communism could explain McCarthy’s
determination to keep him around.

While the chairman, still smiling, took a drink by himself, the junior
senator from Michigan sat in silence for a last few seconds. But then
—perhaps only, Tim thought, because he feared Tommy’s
displeasure—Potter found his voice and seeded the clouds for
McCarthy’s next mood-storm: “We can get the army to fire John
Adams, too, Joe. We can make it look like a trade, with fault on both
sides. But unless Roy goes, this whole thing is going to have to be
investigated, maybe even in front of television cameras.”
McCarthy’s smile disappeared, but no thunder issued from behind
the new clouds on his visage. He seemed to be considering the
possibility those cameras would present him, how they might be a
risk worth taking if he could bend the hearings in his own direction,
change their subject once the lights came up and the lenses opened.
For the moment, however, it seemed he would err on the side of
caution. “You tell your new friend Wilson to keep that report to
himself from now on. We’ve got files of our own. We’ve got
typewriters, too. You tell him that, Charlie.”
The meeting was over, and by all appearances McCarthy, now on
his feet, was judging it a success. He reached into the office
refrigerator for three small wheels of Wisconsin cheese, one for Tim,
one for Potter, and one for Tommy McIntyre. All of them, the
chairman included, were soon exiting Room 428 and walking down
the corridor.
“Did you hear Flanders on the floor yesterday?” asked McCarthy.
“It was better than Murrow and all that Julius Caesar crap. Listen to
this,” he said, urging them to slow down while he pulled a newspaper
clipping from his pocket. McCarthy began quoting the Vermont
senator’s remarks: “‘In this battle of the agelong war’—I guess he
means against the Communists—‘what is the part played by the
junior senator from Wisconsin? He dons his war paint. He goes into
his war dance. He emits his war whoops. He goes forth to battle and
proudly returns with the scalp of a pink army dentist.’”

McCarthy’s laughter bounced off the walls of the SOB. At the
landing of the staircase, by the blue-and-white peppermint-stick
columns, he said goodbye to his visitors with a high, enthusiastic
wave that parted the halves of his unbuttoned jacket and revealed
the holstered pistol beneath.

CHAPTER FIFTEEN

March 19, 1954
Whenever the radio played “Secret Love,” Tim believed for a few
moments that he had something in common with other Americans in
the throes of romance. The song had been riding the airwaves for
weeks, and it made him feel more normal than furtive, at least until
Doris Day reached the tune’s happy ending. Right now, late on a
Friday night when he was home alone working, the song seemed
more than he could stand, so he turned the dial and arrived, almost
immediately, at the sound of Joe McCarthy, speaking live from
Milwaukee about the Democratic party’s “twenty years of treason,
twenty years of betrayal.” Along with roars of approval from a hotel
banquet room, the microphones were picking up traces of a “Joe
Must Go!” chant from the opposing rally outside.
“Tonight,” McCarthy intoned, “I shall place before the greatest of all
juries, the American people, an indictment of twenty counts, picked
at random.”
The “m” buzzed through the mesh of the Philco.
McCarthy’s text and the protesting chant competed like the parallel
columns Tim was constructing on a legal pad. The crux of the
charges and countercharges already seemed pretty clear to the
public: the army, through its secretary Robert Stevens and counsel
John Adams, was claiming that all sorts of extravagant pressure had
been brought to bear by Senator McCarthy and Roy Cohn to make
Private David Schine’s life in the service a kind of holiday; on the
contrary, the senator and Cohn continued to assert that the army
was holding Schine “hostage”—preventing him from continuing to
assist the committee and threatening the young man with overseas

duty as a means of getting McCarthy to call off his probe into the
army’s tolerance of subversives at Fort Monmouth.
But if the crux was clear, a farrago of detail still swirled underneath
it. Tim looked at the columns he was composing for Tommy McIntyre
and Senator Potter, and wondered if he’d ever master their
contradictions:

ARMY
CLAIMSMcCARTHY MEMORANDA
(ADAMS
CHRONOLOGY)

Dec. 9: AdamsDec. 9: Confidential memo from Roy C to Sen. McC: “John
says
he Adams said today…that he had gotten specific
complained to information for us about an Air Force base where there
Sen. McC about were a large number of homosexuals. He said he would
Roy
C’s trade us that information if we would tell him what the
behavior
and next Army project was that we would investigate.”
threats
re
Schine.
an. 11: AdamsJan. 14: Memo from Roy C to Sen. McC: “John Adams has
visits
Cohn’s been in the office again…said this was the last chance for
office.
Claims me to arrange that law partnership in New York which he
Cohn
said wanted. One would think he was kidding, but his
Stevens
is persistence on this subject makes it clear he was serious.
“through”
as He said he had turned down a job in industry at $17,500
Army Sec’y if and needed a guarantee of $25,000 from a law firm.”
Schine
gets
sent overseas.

Sitting amidst piles of newspapers from the past two weeks, Tim
decided that the whole thing was impossible, like some assignment

from the nuns requiring you to cross-connect the Seven Deadly Sins
and the Four Cardinal Virtues. Was Cohn in love with Schine, or was
Adams in love with money? A week ago, Tommy McIntyre had had
Tim compose Senator Potter’s statement demanding that everybody
be put under oath to sort things out, and four days after that, meeting
in executive session, the committee had agreed—beginning in a few
weeks, in front of television cameras—to investigate itself.
Tim was growing accustomed to the circularity of all this, and to
the possibility that truth might be reachable only by riding on wheels
within wheels. Did McCarthy have something on Tommy McIntyre
(“Everybody’s people come from someplace”), and did Tommy also
have something on Potter? Something to account for his evergreater command of the senator’s office? Since the afternoon when
the three of them experienced McCarthy’s wrath and bonhomie,
Tommy had been so busy that Tim had had no chance to question
the older man about his political past. When McIntyre slowed down
enough for even a short snatch of conversation, he talked in riddles,
sententiae, and snippets of poetry.
Closing his eyes and breathing in the woody aroma of the
hardware store below, Tim tried to reestablish the concentration
required for his parallel columns, but was stopped by the sound of
footsteps on the stairs.
“You need a TV, Skippy.”
As soon as he came in, Fuller pointed to the radio, from which
McCarthy’s consonants continued to buzz. Slightly and thrillingly
drunk, he sat down on the edge of the desk and nodded toward an
especially ugly picture of Cohn in the Evening Star. “Without a TV,”
said Fuller, “you missed him on Meet the Press last Sunday. Trust
me: he’s not as sweet as he looks.”
He took off his suit jacket—all the warm, nearly spring night
required—and extracted from it a white card, which he handed to

Tim. “For your information,” he said. “Forwarded from Bar Harbor by
the paterfamilias.” The card invited the holder to the Maine state
Republican convention, set for the first and second of April.
“According to Father,” Fuller explained, “your Mr. Jones’s supporters
are urging that he be allowed to speak to the delegates along with
‘Magrit.’” He pronounced Mrs. Smith’s name with an old Mainer’s
accent.
Tim mentioned the latest that he’d heard in the office. “Jones is
now giving speeches that refer to himself as a ‘member of the
committee’! He used to just say he ‘sat in’ once in a while.”
Fuller flipped through the stack of newspapers on the desk until he
found Monday’s Washington Post. “Good boy,” he said. “Glad to see
you’re sometimes trading up from the Star, if only a small bit.” As
Hawkins looked for the correct page, Tim considered the praise he’d
just been given, which was really a piece of the tutelage that
sometimes confused him—as when Hawkins suggested he get
himself something better than the Van Heusen shirt he’d regarded as
a splurge to begin with.
“Here it is,” said Hawkins, pointing to a column by the Alsop
brothers, Joseph and Stewart. “‘The uncensored Adams chronology
is also understood to contain an indication that Cohn was receiving
substantial financial assistance from Schine, while he was
threatening to “wreck the army” in order to make his rich friend’s life
more comfortable.’”
“That’s not true,” said Tim. “It’s Adams who was interested in
money. I think.”
“Then what is the truth?” asked Fuller. “Where Cohn is
concerned.”
“Cohn is in love with Schine.” Tim was struck by the difficulty of
just saying it.

“Good,” said Hawkins. “Our little boy is growing up. But read on.”
He pointed to the column’s next sentence and handed the paper to
Tim, who read from it aloud:
“‘This financial dependence would help to explain Cohn’s feverish
desire to be of service to Schine. It does not explain the strength of
Cohn’s apparent hold on McCarthy.’”
Tim looked up, confused. “It’s true,” he said, “that McCarthy
doesn’t speak very well of Schine unless Cohn is around.”
“Think harder, Timothy.”
Tim put down the newspaper. “It gives me a headache. I’ve been
trying to figure out what McCarthy has on McIntyre and what
McIntyre has on Potter.” He walked over to Fuller and kissed him. “I
know what they could all have on me.”
Hawkins lightly kissed him back and let him sit on his lap. “I could
tell you what I’ve got on Joe Alsop,” he whispered, thinking of the
spring day last year when the elder, unmarried brother of the
columnist duo had first leered in his direction at the coat check of the
Metropolitan Club. The card that came around the following morning
had read more like a mash note than a luncheon invitation.
“You’re as bad as Tommy McIntyre,” said Tim, who believed Fuller
was kidding. “The only thing I want to have on you are these.” He
pointed to his lips, before kissing Hawk’s neck.
“Just remember, Skippy. The only thing that counts in all this is
what anybody has on McCarthy. Got that?” He gently deposited him
back in the desk chair, as if Tim, freshly instructed, could now return
to work.
For the past week and a half, Tim had wanted to tell Hawkins
about his ten minutes in McCarthy’s office. But after the night of the
Murrow program, when Hawkins seemed to keep him at arm’s

length, he had forced himself not to come around; he’d made himself
wait for Hawkins’ appearance here. He now wanted to say “I’m glad
you came over,” but it was too simple and direct, somehow even
more honest than the kisses he’d planted.
“I need to believe,” he explained instead, “that there’s still at least
a chance Adams and Stevens could be the worst ones in all this.
Maybe they’re not worthy of the soldiers they’re in charge of. Maybe
they were trying to stop the Fort Monmouth investigation—you know,
because they’re bureaucrats trying to protect themselves.”
He knew, as he spoke, that his dread of McCarthy must be
showing in his face, as it had started doing months ago in front of
Kenneth Woodforde. He further knew, as his eyes darted to the
parallel lists, that the “McCarthy Memoranda,” especially the
communications from Cohn, had the too-good-to-be-true
smoothness of forgery. We’ve got typewriters, too.
“Where have you been?” he asked Hawkins, willing to risk
humiliation if it would extract him from the conundrum of McCarthy.
“Out with the dullest crowd imaginable.”
“Was the brewer there?” He knew that Hawkins didn’t think much
of Mary Johnson’s fiancé; he also knew Hawk wasn’t about to
answer for the whole last ten days.
Fuller shook his head. “No brewer. Two former classmates. Plus
one wife, one girlfriend.”
“How about you?” asked Tim. “Did you go with a girl?”
“Of course,” said Fuller.
The girls never made Tim feel jealous; the ease with which they
were pressed into service—like handkerchiefs taken from a drawer—
only added to Hawkins’ allure.

“Did you know Schine?” The question had only now occurred to
Tim. “When you were at Harvard?”
“Ever so slightly. We overlapped—so not to speak—for a year or
two. He would have fit right in with tonight’s crowd.”
“He’s not your type, right?” said Tim, hoping his teasing would
provoke a measure of the same.
“Nor is Cohn his. Private Schine likes the ladies. Your buddy Roy
is going to wear out his lawyer’s larynx barking up that particular
tree.”
“Yeah,” said Tim, amorous once more. He got up from the desk in
search of a kiss. “You like them shorter, skinnier. With a few freckles.
A stammer.” He buried his head against Hawkins’ shoulder.
“Easy, Timmy, it’s a school night.”
He felt immediate despair: if Hawk really wanted to go to bed with
him, there would be, he knew, no consideration less important than
the clock.
“I hate working Saturdays,” he managed to complain. “It’s only
those ancient bachelors like Senator Russell who enjoy them. They
get so lonely in their hotel rooms they wish everyone would come in
on Sundays.” He paused, hoping that Hawk would reconsider, would
sigh forbearingly, then laugh, then throw him down on the blue
bedspread. But nothing. “Don’t you have to work tomorrow, too?”
Hawkins shook his head. “Middle rank has its privileges.” Since his
triumph over McLeod, he’d come in fewer Saturday mornings than
he’d missed. “In my case, the night is young.”
“Take me out into it.” Tim knew his smile must look as desperate
as any flashed by a politician behind in the polls. “Make me the
drunk version of your type. One spiked dulce de leche and the

spectacles come flying off. The stammer disappears.” Be here with
me at seven in the morning. Force me to stay in bed another hour.
Keep me from going to Mass and being the only Catechumen there,
the one who sits in the back no longer daring to take Communion.
Fuller smiled but didn’t move. After a long moment, he at last said:
“All those things—skinny boy, freckles, specs, stammer—they’re
certainly a part of my type.”
Tim warmed with encouragement. “I can supply the rest of it, too.”
Hawk tugged on his ear. “Let’s go find the rest of it.”
Tim looked around, comically, to his left and then right and then
behind, as if trying to spot the rest of himself.
“Let’s go out and find it together,” Hawkins said, his voice lower
than before. He put his arm over Tim’s shoulder. “Maybe the two of
us can become the three of us.”
Tim felt the back of his neck flush.
Hawkins tried for a lighter touch. “You know,” he joked. “Like Joe
and Roy and Dave. What do you say?”
Tim crossed the room and stood at the sink. “No, Mr. Fuller.” They
were the words he’d said at this same spot five months ago, but this
time there was no chance of their being a sin, mortal or venial; they
contained no lie.
What he said next might have been a line from a movie, except for
the excruciating effort it took to summon the words: “Get out and
don’t come back.”
Fuller straightened the papers he’d displaced in sitting down on
the desk. Ten seconds later, the door had closed and Tim could hear
the ex–track star’s light, heedless descent of the stairs.

Out on the street, Fuller walked west, wondering where he could
catch a cab on the deserted Hill. He passed a telephone booth and
thought of calling Mary Johnson, who probably was out with the
brewer, which was too bad, because he remained curious about
something. He wanted to ask her what credit one got for giving
something up when Lent was halfway through. Did you get more if
the renunciation was meant to be for good, to go beyond Easter? I
did what you told me to, he wanted to say. He’d devised the
stratagem himself, but had carried it out for the reason she’d
suggested. Wouldn’t sooner rather than later hurt him less?
Now that he’d done his good deed, he was—what, precisely?
Angry? Sad? He dismissed the questions and kept walking, not in
the direction of a bar, but toward home, where tonight, for once, he’d
intended going all along.

CHAPTER SIXTEEN

April 7, 1954
“Well,” said Tommy McIntyre, “there’s Jeannie, but where’s Joe?”
McCarthy’s young wife sat across the dining room of the Carroll
Arms, lunching with George Sokolsky, the Hearst columnist who’d
helped script her husband’s televised rebuttal of Murrow last night.
The senator’s reply had come late and—even Joe’s friends thought
—fallen rather flat, consisting largely of references to Murrow’s leftwing friends from the 1930s, most of them respectable not only now
but then.
Tommy took scornful note of the wine bottle between Sokolsky and
Jean McCarthy. “They’ll probably keep at it straight until they pour
themselves into a cab for dinner at the Colony.”
Tim looked at Mrs. McCarthy, pretty as a Miss America, and
wondered why she hadn’t ended up with a man who looked like
Hawkins Fuller instead of someone fifteen years older who was
running to blotches and fat. The answer had to lie in the way she lit
up, as if for a camera, each time she caught a senator or reporter, or
even a staffer as junior as himself, turning an eye in her direction.
Joe McCarthy was the source from which all that derived.
Sokolsky’s speech had contained one peculiar patch, a piece of
hit-and-run rhetoric in which McCarthy offered up the possibility that
everyone hearing his voice might soon die, and the nation itself be
destroyed, because of unnamed traitors who had slowed down
production of the U.S. hydrogen bomb. And now, as Tim looked into
his water glass, he felt himself wishing for the prophecy’s fulfillment
—a manmade Second Coming, all doom and no redemption.

Weeks without Hawkins had left him with circles under the eyes
and even thinner. He now took a cigarette whenever Tommy offered
an open pack, and after work crawled into the bed he’d left unmade
that morning. Good Friday was nine days away and he would not be
heading home to New York: longing for Hawkins had made
Thanksgiving and Christmas hard enough; consciousness of
banishment would be unbearable in Grandma Gaffney’s parlor.
Once he failed to make his Easter duty at the Communion rail, his
estrangement from the Body of Christ would become official and
another mortal sin upon his soul. Several times during the last few
weeks he had come close to entering the confessional, in search not
of absolution but some temporary solace. Yet what could he possibly
say in the darkened booth? Bless me, Father, for I have been unable
to sin; he won’t see me.
Should he have gone looking for the third man, then gone to bed
with him and Hawk? Should he send Hawk a funny, forgivenessseeking note that made a joke about the Holy Trinity? Or just offer an
abject below-stairs apology, as even his implacable grandmother
must once or twice have done to the snotty boarding-school girls,
lest she lose the situation on which her life depended?
Would sleeping with two men have been doubly sinful, or just
“immature”—as men like himself were judged to be by even
sympathetic observers? Would it have been, perhaps, no worse than
joining the jerkoff circles of other boys on the rooftop over Ninth
Avenue, or by the lake up near Ellenville during one of the family’s
rare summer weeks outside the city? Maybe. But if he’d not been
able to make himself enter those harmless groupings in the light of
day, how could he now expect to lie in the dark while, with one hand,
Hawk caressed him and, with the other, pleasured someone else?
Tommy hit his water glass with a knife. “Snap to it, Mr. Laughlin.
There’s work to be done.”

Three other Senate aides—assistants to Mundt and Dworshak and
McClellan—were at the table. All had extracted pads from
briefcases, ready to focus on the ground rules for what people were
already calling the Army–McCarthy hearings. Mr. O’Brien and Mr.
Matthews, Mundt’s man and McClellan’s, laughed when each saw
the other click open a PaperMate pen whose barrel bore the
signature of Minority Leader Lyndon B. Johnson. “He must give out
five hundred of those a day,” said O’Brien.
Tommy began making energetic notes. “All right, gentlemen,” he
said, “let’s remember the decision from the executive session:
nothing procedural about these hearings will create a precedent for
any other set.”
“That’s fine with my man,” said O’Brien, whose boss, the
unprepossessing Senator Mundt, would chair the sessions. “He sure
isn’t going to want to do this again.”
Sandor Klein, assistant to Senator Dworshak, nervously sketched
a little chart. His own boss’s position was the most delicate of any of
the panel’s senators, McCarthy having handpicked the Idaho
Republican to replace him as a voting member of the committee.
McCarthy would still be allowed to cross-examine witnesses—when
he wasn’t being questioned himself. “Christ,” said Klein, “how could
this create a precedent? Joe is going to be plaintiff, prosecutor, and
defendant—not to mention his own mouthpiece, when Cohn is
otherwise occupied.”
Matthews recalled the laughing plea that McCarthy had made to
Senator McClellan, the committee’s former chairman, when the
majority shifted to the Republicans in ’52: “‘But, Jack, you’ve got to
stay on as ranking Democrat. Who the hell else is going to keep an
eye on me?’”
Klein fretted: “I don’t know how we’re going to have enough people
to handle the mail this is going to generate.”

Tommy, beginning to relax a bit, smiled. “We’re short one staffer
ourselves. I refer of course to Mr. Jones.” Tommy had helped to
arrange a rude reception for Mrs. Smith’s challenger at the state
convention in Bangor; he’d also, he now informed the table,
managed to spread across Maine the story that Jones had run over
his own dog and taken its still-breathing carcass to the town dump.
This produced laughter all around, except from Tim, who felt ever
more gray and stateless in a world of black and white. McCarthyite
tactics were all right, it seemed, so long as they were applied against
McCarthy.
Maybe in his despair (another mortal sin), he was taking too
seriously what was just the ordinary stuff of politics. After all, Mr.
O’Brien, aide to the McCarthy-supporting Mundt, was laughing
louder than anyone.
A small commotion across the room caught everybody’s attention.
Two tables away from Jean McCarthy, Mrs. Watt, the committee’s
chief clerk and supposedly a fan of Joe’s, was sharply dismissing
someone who’d set down a piece of paper and a pen beside her
buttered roll.
“Ruthie looks miffed,” said Matthews.
“Timothy, go see what that’s all about. Discreetly.”
Obeying McIntyre, Tim rose from the table and got himself as
close as he could to Mrs. Watt by pretending to straighten his tie in
front of a mirror.
“I won’t sign it!” she repeated, loud enough for half the dining room
to hear. Unnoticed in the hubbub, Tim moved even nearer to her
table, then returned to his own.
“It’s a loyalty pledge,” he listlessly reported, just as his sandwich
arrived. “A messenger gave it to her waiter. The committee staff are

being asked to guarantee their support for Senator McCarthy and Mr.
Cohn.”
“By whom?” asked Matthews.
“I couldn’t tell,” answered Tim.
“Well, what’s it supposed to accomplish?” Matthews inquired.
“It’s not what it will accomplish,” said Tommy McIntyre, delighted.
“It’s what it signifies. A touch of desperation, I’d say. The two of them
are soldering themselves a little closer together. Nice work, Timothy.
We ought to reward you with another pair of those.” He pointed to
Tim’s cuff links.
“FH,” said Klein, noticing the initials but reading from the right wrist
to the left. “What does that stand for?”
“Fordham History,” said Tim, after taking a sip of water. “It’s the
department I majored in at school.”
He could see that Tommy didn’t believe the explanation. Fine, he
thought. Now you’ve got something on me.
“With any luck,” said O’Brien, “you can win a pair of links off Joe.”
He pointed with awe to Oklahoma’s Senator Kerr, who’d just entered
the dining room. The richest man in the upper body was also its best
card player, never going anywhere with less than five thousand in his
pocket. Once or twice at the poker table he’d taken almost that much
off his colleague from Wisconsin.
Tim could see Jean McCarthy coming back from the powder room,
waving to the waiter who’d done his duty with the loyalty letter,
whatever its ultimate lack of success. He could also now see
Senator Hunt waving a swollen right hand—there were rumors of
kidney problems—to greet an elderly lady near the maître d’s stand;

she congratulated him on having the other day announced that he
would run for another term after all.
Mr. Matthews, getting back to business with the others, elaborated
upon the “musical chairs” rule that had been adopted to
accommodate the cameramen who’d be televising the hearings:
each day senators and lawyers around the giant table would move
one seat to their right, so that the same players wouldn’t fill the
screen day after day.
“Well,” said Senator Mundt’s aide, “this will give Joe a bigger
microphone than he’s ever had before.”
“And you think that’ll be good for him?” snapped Tommy.
“McIntyre,” asked Matthews, “where is your man in all of this?”
“I believe,” said Tommy, “that he’d actually like to get at the truth.
Poor bastard.”
Tim suspected this was true, that he and Senator Potter were in
the same forlorn position, hoping the army’s executives might be
lying a little more than McCarthy and Cohn. And if they weren’t?
Would that invalidate everything else the committee had tried to
accomplish? Would it leave Father Beane and his exemplary kind
any safer from the Communists’ universal advance?
He closed his eyes and again, almost peacefully, imagined a
Russian H-bomb flying toward Washington.
None of it mattered. He now knew that he himself would tell any
lie, deny even Christ, for one more touch of Hawkins’ hand. These
past few weeks, in his own bed several blocks from here, he had
found himself unable even to masturbate. He would try, thinking of all
the two of them had done, of the smell of Hawk’s hair and neck and
armpit, where his own tongue had long since gotten used to going.
He would manage to arouse himself, until some tender memory—

There. You’re healed—would invade his loins and he would climax, if
at all, with a strange lack of sensation, like the absence of grace.
Are you my brave boy? No, I am not. I need you to rescue and
redeem me.
“So Charlie Potter wants the truth,” said Matthews. “Well, maybe
he’ll get it for us.”
“Oh,” replied Tommy to the rest of the table, “he’s going to get us
much more than that.”

CHAPTER SEVENTEEN

April 30, 1954
“So, yesterday,” asked Cecil Holland, “who was calling who queer?”
“Whom,” said Miss McGrory in her softest voice. The Evening Star
had freed her from the book page to write colorful sidebars for
Holland’s regular reports on the week-old Army–McCarthy hearings,
and the two of them were waiting for the Friday afternoon session to
start, recalling the previous day’s exchange between McCarthy and
Joseph Welch, the Boston lawyer for Secretary Stevens and John
Adams. The winsome attorney had sarcastically wondered if
McCarthy thought a “pixie” was responsible for cropping a
photograph whose alteration McCarthy claimed to know nothing
about. Pressed to define “pixie,” a creature McCarthy suggested
Welch “might be an expert on,” the lawyer explained that a pixie “is a
close relative to a ‘fairy.’ Shall I proceed, sir? Have I enlightened
you?”
The press had given the round to Welch. Even though propriety
kept them from noting his apparent, if oblique, reference to rumors of
McCarthy’s homosexuality, they regarded the attorney’s innuendo as
a fine achievement, whereas McCarthy’s suggestion of the same
about Welch was considered a smear. All of it, thought Tim—who
was trying to take pleasure in the greetings he’d just gotten from
Miss McGrory and Mr. Holland—felt much the same as Robert
Jones’s dead dog. Any rules of engagement, let alone any standards
of personal conduct, were now laughably antique. Even the ferocious
Roy Cohn, the lights in his glass house turned up high, had looked
nervous during yesterday’s duel between McCarthy and Welch.

Cohn looked a bit nervous now, too, waiting as they all were for
the testimony of Private Schine. Secretary Stevens had been on the
stand almost the whole week, and he’d be back after the break he
was being granted today for exhaustion. In the meantime, soon, they
would be hearing from the young man who, in immediate terms, this
was all about: G. David Schine, either the object of Roy Cohn’s
obsession, or the “hostage” of an army fearing Cohn’s scrutiny.
The atmosphere in the Caucus Room was eerie, that of an
interminable midnight Mass. The bemedaled army brass that Welch
each day brought to the front row of spectators’ seats sat, brave and
solid, like a mute choir in coats of different colors. To keep glare off
the TV cameras, the room’s thick curtains remained closed, a purple
backdrop for the cigarette smoke rising up the chamber’s great
Corinthian columns. Against the front wall a large wooden bench
with a high back panel made the committee table look even more
like an altar, albeit one whose feet were beset with snakes from
some netherworld: the television cables on the carpet.
Once the principals had reassembled, Senator Mundt gaveled the
proceedings to order. He complimented the audience on its good
behavior, the way he did at the beginning of every session, as if
fearing a turn to the riotous at any moment. Tim brought a stack of
papers to Senator Potter’s place at the enormous table, atop which
he could actually hear the slosh of McCarthy’s bourbon bottle when
somebody moved his briefcase. Although everyone continued to
remark on television’s influence over the proceedings, Tim had been
more reminded of his old radio programs like Mr. Keen. Listening to
the different speakers while his eyes concentrated on the notepads
and transcript in his lap, he found himself following the alternations
by changes in voice. He had learned to distinguish the loud
Tennessee drawl of Ray Jenkins, the temporary counsel hired to
question both sides, from the thick Arkansas locutions of Senator
McClellan, whose bad mood never seemed to lift. The nasal,
countrified tones of Mr. Welch, a sharpie masquerading as an
innocent, actually sounded a lot like Fred Allen.

Tim now exchanged a nod with Kenneth Woodforde in the press
section, though they’d never had another conversation since the
atrocities hearings (long since forgotten and still lacking a final
report) back in December.
Before Schine took the oath, the senators spent yet another
several minutes on the “doctored” version of a picture taken during
Secretary Stevens’ visit to Fort Dix last fall, when cooperation still
reigned between the army and the committee. This particular print
contained only Stevens and Schine, as opposed to the original,
which had included a third man. When first contested three days
ago, the photo had provoked the pounding of desks and McCarthy’s
barked order that handsome Senator Symington be quiet. This
afternoon, however, the committee’s disagreements seemed like a
weary seminar in art appreciation, full of ineffable and arcane
questions about the meaning of the picture and its provenance. As
Tim saw it, Stevens was looking, affably, at Schine—and no one else
—in both the larger and cropped versions, although the photograph
was so innocuous that either way it made no difference. On this
matter, surely, Roy Cohn was right. In fact, given that McCarthy and
Cohn’s “eleven memoranda” were looking more suspicious by the
day, shrinking the picture seemed about the least underhanded thing
the senator’s office had recently done in this case. But the press kept
awarding the army points over what Welch continued to call the
“shamefully cut-down” photograph, making it sound like a farm boy
whose arm had been sliced off by some shoddy piece of machinery.
At last Private G. David Schine raised his hand and swore to tell
the truth. Blond, Jewish, and beautiful in a lazy way, he appeared to
Tim like the corrupt young emperor from a biblical movie. When
asked about the manner in which he’d delivered the vexing
photograph, once it had been requested for the investigation, he said
he’d brought it to George Anastos, a committee staffer, at the Colony
restaurant:

MR. JENKINS: Do you remember what you ate there that night?
PVT. SCHINE: I had a butterscotch sundae.

The soldier was soon pouting and talking back to the committee:
“Since I have been in the army, sir, I have been subjected to many
pressures. I have been called upon to do many things.” And yet,
there were hints of enjoyment in his own performance. Tim had this
morning heard Mrs. Watt complain to another secretary about
Schine’s asking if he could expense the calls he’d made alerting
friends in California to the exact time of his appearance on television.
Would the hotel-chain heir, unpaid during his days on the committee
staff, take the $6-per-day witness fee? Tim wondered, as he watched
Cohn study the disputed picture and then Schine himself. Was this
the look of love? Or did the chief counsel’s intense expression
indicate only an attempt, telepathic and fervent, to will Schine into a
higher articulacy than the private could accomplish on his own?
“I have no questions,” said Senator Potter, once his turn came
around. A moment later, when it came again, he declared, “I have no
further questions.” Maybe he was hopeless, thought Tim, who’d
lately been hearing Tommy McIntyre refer to the senator as “our
pottered plant.” Even so, Tim could see no real look of displeasure
on Tommy’s face as their boss for a third time let the microphone
pass. Perhaps McIntyre didn’t want his plant, so carefully tended, to
bloom too soon?
An hour would expire before McCarthy exploded with a defense of
Schine that he’d kept bottled up during all the inquiries into the
private’s whereabouts, weekend passes, and butterscotch sundaes.
His colleagues’ questions were “ridiculous,” the senator claimed;
abusive even, if one considered how Stevens was being pampered
with a day off. The photographers, as always, sprang into action at
the first sign of Joe’s agitation, and this time one of them even

managed to knock over McClellan’s water glass, earning a rebuke
from Senator Jackson. Before long, Welch was suggesting it might
be time for them all to adjourn—and for Schine to get himself a
lawyer. With an excess of either nerve or stupidity—Schine often
looked so impassive it was difficult to tell—the private asked the
chairman: “Since I am in the army, sir, and since Mr. Welch is the
counselor for the army, sir, doesn’t that automatically make him one
of my counselors?”
“I believe not,” Senator Mundt replied.
Cohn, too, shook his head no, while allowing his gaze to linger on
the handsome soldier. In the two of them Tim saw a crude Herblock
cartoon of himself and Hawkins Fuller, though he felt sure nothing
had ever been consummated between the lawyer and the private.
And he wondered: Would he himself have been better off loving
Hawkins without any physical return? Without the illusions of
emotional requitement he sometimes allowed sex to impose? One
heard that Schine actually liked Cohn; could anyone say that
Hawkins Fuller liked Timothy Laughlin?
Tim would never learn whether he was ready to face this last
question, because at the moment he posed it to himself, he heard
Hawkins whisper: “I’ve decided to forgive you, Skippy.”
Dumbstruck, he turned around to look. Hawk’s hand was on his
shoulder—a mirage brought forth by his own weeks of thirst and
suffering?
“Go tell them you’re sick and have to leave right now. Don’t wait
for the gavel. Meet me in ten minutes on the southwest corner.”
He made it there in eight, after lying to Tommy McIntyre, racing
back to Potter’s office in the Capitol, shutting his desk lamp, and,
once he saw Hawkins’ big green Buick waiting for him outside the
SOB, wondering if he’d left any lights burning at home. He realized

now that they were going away. To Charlottesville, for the weekend,
Hawk explained.
He sat in silence all the way over the Memorial Bridge and through
the red-bricked garden apartments of Arlington, offering no argument
or banter, nothing that began “You’re forgiving me?” He said nothing
at all, as if, unlike the doubtful Private Schine, he really were a
hostage, one who at any moment might be thrown out upon the open
road. Hawkins, too, all the way to Manassas with the radio off, said
nothing.
But no, this could only be good, could only be another miracle on
the order of Hawkins’ telephone call to the Star last September.
“A hundred minutes ago,” Tim finally said, as they passed the
battlefield cemetery, “I’d have been wishing I were lying there.”
“Having to look at Karl Mundt will do that, I’m sure,” said Hawkins,
never taking his eyes from the road.
Tim struggled to keep from fishing, from begging for reassurance:
You know what I meant.
“A hundred years ago,” said Hawkins, “you would have been here,
freshly dead. While your Grandma Gaffney was out rioting against
the draft that stole you for a drummer boy.”
“Before I died I would have had a case on you, in your fancy
uniform at the head of a Zouave regiment.”
“No, you wouldn’t have. You’d never have met me. I’d have bought
my way out of conscription for three hundred dollars, so that I could
still be eating oysters at Delmonico’s while you were cracking your
poor Irish teeth on hardtack.”
Tim smiled and rested his head against the backseat. A minute
later he fell asleep, exhausted with relief as they continued riding

westward. He slept until the beginning of a bright orange sunset
made itself felt through his closed eyelids and woke him to the sight
of a hundred pink flowering trees, the smell of their blossoms rushing
through the car’s open windows like the surge of violins on one of his
sister’s Puccini records. He burst into sobs.
“I can’t—” said Hawkins.
“I know,” said Tim, recovering as quickly as he could. “I know. You
can’t have this.”
In fact Fuller was thinking: No, what I can’t do is even tell you why
I came across town—how it was the television picture I saw of you
emptying Potter’s ashtray, looking gaunt and desperate, the circles
under your eyes as dark as the ones under McCarthy’s. And
because of the glimpse I caught of that cold-eyed prick Bob
Kennedy, no different from the way he was at Harvard a half dozen
years ago, glancing at you while you fussed over the ashtray,
annoyed that this hardworking little fairy was cluttering up a piece of
history in the making.
That was what he wanted to say and couldn’t. But, yes, he did
want Tim to stop crying now, and he was wishing he’d resisted the
impulse to drive across town and get him. He was wishing he were
right now back with the uncomplicated cracker kid he’d had the other
night, a rawboned boy who no more considered it sick to mess
around with another man than it might be to eat a bowl of ice cream
between two helpings of cotton candy.
He wished he weren’t putting them both through this.
And yet, for all that, he wanted to hear Tim’s chatter, wanted the
intermittent pleasure of protecting him; and wanted to fuck him on
the floor of the car once it was dark enough to pull over into the
woods.

They stopped to buy him a toothbrush and underwear and a
second shirt, and then had dinner on King Street before browsing the
used bookstore a block away and walking along the colonnade of
rooms on the university lawn, where they looked out of place with
their un-crewcut hair and made jokes about the white-bucked college
boys, even jokes about taking one of them back to the hotel.
When they checked into their room, Tim’s tears came again, from
some borderless place between anguish and joy, where he was
struggling to believe that the two of them had actually been visible
together, out in public, in a restaurant and a store. “Do you know
what? It’s the same question!” he cried, laughing and shaking. “The
same question! The one I was asking myself when you wouldn’t
come back to me and the one I’ve been asking myself all night, when
you’ve made me happier than I’ve ever been! What did I do to
deserve this? The same question!”
During all the coltish kisses with which he always sought Hawkins’
attentions, he had never asked for a specific pleasure or gratification,
taking care always to follow Hawk’s direction, maximizing his
beloved’s satisfaction and thus, he thought, his own. But tonight,
physically spent before he had opened a single shirt button, he
walked over to the wall, shut the light switch, and in the darkness,
well above a whisper, said, “Hit me.”
Hawkins looked at him for several seconds. And then, not for
excitement, and not from vexation, but only because he thought he
understood and had been asked for a tenderness he could actually
express, he raised his open hand and struck Tim once across the
face.

CHAPTER EIGHTEEN

May 12, 1954
“He sounds a little like Mr. Peepers,” said Beverly Phillips. “You
know, whatsisname, Wally Cox.”
Listening to John Adams’ clipped, nasal tones on a television set
in the State Department cafeteria, Hawkins Fuller and Mary Johnson
couldn’t disagree with her. The two of them and Beverly were having
a mid-afternoon cup of coffee amidst a few dozen other employees
who were generally delighted by the embarrassment the hearings
had caused State’s senatorial nemesis, Joe McCarthy.
The committee’s special counsel, Ray Jenkins, had become even
more theatrical than Welch, thought Mary. He clearly relished what
Senator Mundt called his “Dr. Jekyll and Mr. Hyde role” of conducting
both the direct and cross-examinations of whoever might be in the
witness chair. This afternoon it was Adams, the army counsel, who
seemed exasperated by almost everything—especially, Mary
thought, the way Jenkins kept calling Schine “this boy.” Instead of
helping to establish what Adams suggestively called Cohn’s
“extreme interest” in the private, its effect was to make Schine seem
just another all-American draftee who couldn’t possibly have stirred
up such a fuss.
Adams was now trying to rebut Cohn’s charge that back in
December he had offered to trade some juicy leads about
homosexual activity on several navy and air force bases—surely a
good subject for the McCarthy committee to investigate—in
exchange for Cohn’s pledge to drop the Fort Monmouth inquiry.

“I never made such an offer,” Adams now declared. “I never would
make such an offer. I never had such information to offer.”
Beverly and Mary avoided each other’s glance. Fuller added
another teaspoon of sugar to his coffee.
What, Adams said, he had mentioned to Cohn—without ever
suggesting a “trade”—was an ongoing investigation of
homosexuality, by Secretary Stevens’ office, at a single army base,
in the South. That was all.

MR. JENKINS: It wasn’t in Tennessee, Mr. Adams, was it?
MR. ADAMS: No, sir; it wasn’t.
SENATOR McCLELLAN: A point of order. Let’s exclude Arkansas.
MR. ADAMS: I can do that, sir.
SENATOR MUNDT: The Chair would like to raise a point of order

in behalf of South Dakota, which might also be included in the
South.
MR. ADAMS: I can include all of the states of the members of this

committee.

The camera panned the room to show the loud, prolonged laughter
that was filling it. Roy Cohn’s participation in the merriment, visible
for a second or two, was hearty enough that viewers might
reasonably think he would now, at this moment of relaxed male
fellowship, extend his hand across the table and ask Adams to bury
the hatchet.

“That,” said Fuller, “would be a hearing worth hearing. Shining a
light on Camp Pink Palmetto. I’d say this current show lacks the
really dire elements of the committee’s best work.” He went on to tell
the tale of how a witness in one of McCarthy’s investigations,
accidentally subpoenaed for 10:30 p.m. instead of a.m.—a clerk’s
typo—had shown up anyway, trembling before the night watchman.
Mary guessed he’d gotten this story from Tim. She and Fuller
spoke of him infrequently, but enough for her to be aware of the
Lenten attempt at renunciation and how temporary it had proved.
She was surprised that the boy remained in the picture amidst the
comings and goings of so many others, attributing his survival to
what must be his own desperate persistence.
Adams now spoke of a visit he’d made to the McCarthys’
apartment in mid-January, when things had begun to fray badly
between the army and the committee. Jeannie McCarthy had sat at
some distance from the two men and claimed to be writing thank-you
cards; in fact, Adams felt sure she’d been taking notes on his
conversation with her husband. The army lawyer was proud of how,
during months of “being pounded and pounded and hounded and
hounded about where Schine was going,” he’d had the temerity to
tell Cohn that the private, like ninety percent of all draftees, would
likely be spending some time overseas.
As Adams went on about this and other matters, Mary noticed in
the witness a hint of the same petulance she’d observed in Private
Schine himself. “I never asked Dave Schine for a stick of gum,”
declared Adams, when questioned about the hotel heir’s largesse
with tickets to the theater and the fights; “I am not afraid of Mr.
Cohn,” he further insisted.
“I would be very afraid of Mr. Cohn,” said Beverly.
The camera looked into the farthest reaches of the audience,
catching Perle Mesta in its field of vision; the other day her spot had

been filled by Mrs. Longworth in a wide-brimmed hat.
“That’s Jack Kennedy’s wife, isn’t it?” asked Beverly. Mary said
she wasn’t certain.
“I’m sure it is,” said Beverly, who noted the newlywed’s cute
gamine hairdo. “He’s not on the committee, is he?”
“No,” said Fuller, taking a good look at the young senatorial bride.
“She’s here to watch her brother-in-law. No one in the family seems
able to afford a comb.”
Jenkins’ assistant began questioning Adams about “Senator
Potter’s persistent concern” over the army counsel’s leaks of
information to members of the press, particularly Joe Alsop.
“I thought Potter was supposed to be a cipher,” said Mary, pointing
to his image at the right of the screen.
“He’s been getting some training,” said Fuller. “Or perhaps I should
say some marching orders.”
“You seem well informed about what goes on in his office,” she
ventured.
Beverly interrupted their banter. “You’re forgetting about your own
office.” She pointed to her watch, reminding them that Mr. Morton
had called a staff meeting for four o’clock. “Maybe you want that new
girl putting us all to shame.”
Fuller nodded in the direction of the former girl, Miss Lightfoot,
who sat close to the television, unhurriedly drinking her tea and
taking notes on the proceedings. “It’s just not the same without her,
is it?” he asked, feigning a wistful sigh.
Miss Lightfoot’s former colleagues, after hearing one more partial
piece of the story from one side of the Caucus Room’s tangled web,

began strolling back to the Bureau of Congressional Relations. Fuller
and Mary walked a step or two behind Beverly.
“Even the brewer’s been watching,” said Mary. She’d given up and
begun referring to her fiancé by the only name for him that Fuller
ever used.
“This is turning into a long engagement, isn’t it?” he asked.
Mary pursed her lips.
Fuller pressed her. “Want to talk about it?”
“With you? Heavens, no.”
“Yeah, you do,” said Fuller. “Let me know when and I’ll pencil you
in. By the way,” he added, pointing toward her open-toed footwear,
“your feet are too cold for those shoes.”

At eight minutes before five, just prior to adjournment, Jenkins’
assistant was moved to ask Adams whether it wasn’t true “that many
of these remarks or abuses that you have detailed on the part of Mr.
Cohn were actually made in a facetious or jovial vein?”
Quite the contrary, Adams replied. “On the subject of Schine,
nothing was funny. Nothing was facetious. Nothing was jovial.” Tim
heard this last exchange on the radio in Potter’s Capitol office. He
was happy to be overworked, fielding calls while rewriting a speech
and folding one stack of papers into another. The more he had to do,
the less time there was for being lovesick, which he’d been more
often than not since Charlottesville. In the hotel room there, after a
ferocious storm of sex that had followed the slap to his face, he had
for the first time been allowed to lie all night in Hawkins’ arms. But
when the two of them returned to Washington, things reverted to
their regular pattern, making him miss the near-hysteria he’d felt

during the unexpected travel idyll, and causing him to consider the
possibility that there really was no such thing as happiness or
unhappiness. Maybe there was only intensity—and then everything
else.
He now heard Tommy McIntyre and Senator Potter, fresh from the
Caucus Room, coming into the outer office. Tommy’s sharp voice
was telling the boss that he needed to get a friendly photograph
taken with Welch’s bemedaled brass in the front-row seats.
“Tomorrow, pull yourself out from behind the table the minute
Mundt rings the lunch bell. Let the shutterbugs get a shot of you
instead of Joe. If they see you leaning on your props—one of ’em
maybe lit up by mistake—they’ll come over and take a picture,
believe me.”
Potter said nothing, and Tommy filled the silence with
congratulations for the way the senator had this afternoon “followed
the script” in questioning Adams about leaks.
“I still don’t understand,” Potter wondered, “why you didn’t want
me going after Schine a couple of weeks ago.”
“Because I don’t want you tearing into a soldier, even that one.
Anywho, Charlie, remember the picture when you’re back in there
tomorrow.”
With this reminder, Tommy left the premises to head back to the
SOB, where he’d get the latest on the Maine campaign from Mrs.
Smith’s assistant.
Tim had two letters for Senator Potter to sign. Once he heard him
settled down at his desk, he knocked softly on the door of the inner
office.
“Come in, son,” said Potter, “though I’m afraid I don’t have long.”
The senator explained he was expected at home in Arlington in half

an hour.
“Say hi to Mrs. Potter for me,” Tim requested.
The senator smiled. “Will do. What have you got there?”
“A couple of things for signatures. Plus some telegrams from
Lansing, and two out-of-state interview requests, if you want to
consider them now. The Boulder Daily Camera and the San
Francisco Examiner.”
Potter allowed himself an awed little whistle over the immense
circulation of the latter publication. He dropped the slips of paper
onto his blotter.
“So what do you make of it all, Tim?”
Surprised to be asked, Tim fought against his stammer to declare
that things looked “pretty much as you said, sir. Somebody is not
telling the truth.”
“Yes,” said Potter, “but who?”
“I hope it’s the army, sir, but I guess that wouldn’t be much to be
happy about, either.”
“No, it wouldn’t be.”
After a pause, Tim became bolder. “Mr. McIntyre thinks McCarthy
and Cohn cooked up all the memoranda. He’s sure Mr. Adams is
telling the truth.”
The senator gave a soft, nervous laugh. “Mr. McIntyre tends
toward strong opinions about everything.”
Tim laughed, too. “The other day he told me you’re still trying to
get used to him. Which I guess makes sense: he hasn’t been in the
office much longer than I have.”

Potter’s smile was suddenly thin and tired. He looked over toward
the bookshelf, where a Detroit Tigers cap crowned a cigar humidor.
“Oh,” he said softly, “I’ve known Mr. McIntyre for years.”

CHAPTER NINETEEN

June 2, 1954
“Sir, I probably don’t have any wisdom on this subject at all.”
Roy Cohn’s testimony had drawn even longer lines than usual to
the Caucus Room, but his affectations of modesty, however shrewd,
were disappointing those who’d come to see fireworks. For weeks
he’d been attracting notice for the mutterings and glares he would
exchange with Bob Kennedy, who had encouraged ridicule of Dave
Schine’s record as anticommunist gumshoe and thinker. Spectators
who came every day like courthouse inveterates were still hoping the
two young committee counsels would get into a fistfight before things
adjourned sine die.
But here was Cohn, at last before the footlights of television,
expected to thrust and parry and soliloquize—and all he would do
was “sir” the committee: “It is hard to answer that, sir.” “Sir, that is a
little high for me to pass on.”
He even conceded the likelihood that President Eisenhower
opposed communism as strongly as he did, an admission that came
in response to a soft question from Senator Potter—a tricky changeup from the series of fastballs the lawmaker was throwing. Tim had
seen Tommy McIntyre scripting the queries yesterday afternoon, and
the soundness of the Irishman’s approach now became evident: the
simple questions seemed more damning than Cohn’s answers
seemed exculpatory.

SENATOR POTTER: Did you threaten to wreck the army?

MR. COHN: No, sir. Not only did I not threaten to wreck the army,

but Mr. Adams never believed that for one minute.
SENATOR POTTER: Did you threaten to get Mr. Stevens’ job?
MR. COHN: No, sir, and if I had done that, Mr. Adams would not

have acted the way he did, I am sure.

What emerged, however filtered, was Cohn’s sense that last winter
Adams had been too dumb to respond sensibly to threats that had
indeed been made.
“You can catch your breath, Charlie,” offered Acting Chairman
Mundt. Senators were wanted on the floor for two quick votes; the
committee would take a ten-minute recess.
Tim used the time to annotate the previous day’s transcript and
comb through press requests, as well as to hold a place for Mrs.
Potter in the spectators’ front row.
“You got enough room there, son?”
“Yes, sir, thank you,” said Tim to one of Welch’s telegenic officers,
a General Airlie, according to the nampelate beside his large fruit
salad of decorations.
“What do you do here?” asked the general.
“I work for Senator Potter.”
The officer nodded respectfully. “I had my picture taken with him
the other day.”
Tim might have mentioned how his real boss, Tommy, had last
week scolded Potter for not yet “watching the birdie with the brass.”

But he looked for something else to kindle conversation and came
up with the way Senator Potter planned “to propose a law that would
ban Communists from joining the army.”
General Airlie smiled. “Son, I can’t say I’ve found them dying to get
in.”
Tim laughed.
“Have you been in the service yet?” asked Airlie.
“No, sir,” said Tim, ashamed that the general would surmise how
he’d chosen, like most of his friends and classmates, to wait for the
draft instead of enlisting. He felt an absurd temptation to confide—as
if it were a tale of heroism—the story of how he had at least kept
himself vulnerable to call-up by not admitting to “homosexual
tendencies” when given the chance.
“I’m guessing you’re a college graduate,” said General Airlie.
“Well, you’ll find we’ve still got plenty to offer fellows like yourself—
whether you come to us or we come to you.” He smiled gently.
Tim nearly saluted. The army itself—apart from its lawyers and
political administrators, what it was when left to do its duty outside
this room—sometimes seemed to him the way he imagined Father
Beane’s Chinese chapel: “a clean, well-lighted place,” forthrightly
positioned on good’s salient against evil.
He nodded to the general and went back to annotating the
transcript, which six weeks into the hearings confirmed the near
impossibility that any definitive picture would emerge from them.
During recent days McCarthy had been arguing the duty of federal
employees to leak to him any information they had about
ideologically suspect colleagues; he wanted everyone to know how
much he missed doing the committee’s real business of fighting
“brutalitarian regimes.” Even so, one could measure the
embarrassment he had been suffering the past several weeks by a

speech in which the vice president had gone out of his way to
declare that the real exposure of Communists was being
accomplished by J. Edgar Hoover and Attorney General Brownell. “I
prefer professionals,” said Nixon, “to amateurs on television.”
No matter how murky the truth about Schine remained, the
hearings were going the army’s way. Twenty-four hours ago, Senator
Flanders had taken the Senate floor to ridicule his colleague as an
anti-Semitic and possibly homosexual version of “Dennis the
Menace.” In contrast to what might have happened even a month
ago, there had been no outcry over the denunciation.
The president’s decision to float above the battle, in a kind of
military observation balloon, had been vindicated to his strategists.
This afternoon, as Cohn retook the witness chair, Ike, the recipient of
his Communist-hunting compliments, was at a Washington Senators
game to benefit the Red Cross.
“I would like,” said Senator Potter, who now resumed his
questioning, “to have you comment on the extent of Communist
influence in our government.”
“Yes, sir,” said the still-modest Cohn. “It can only, of course, be a
comment, because I don’t know all the facts.”
“When did that ever stop him?” whispered Miss McGrory.
“During the 1930s and 1940s,” said Cohn, “the Communist Party
of the United States was, I would say, remarkably and unbelievably
successful in placing Communists in a number of key spots in our
government.” But sheer numbers, he explained, weren’t important.
“One is too many. I think Stalin or Lenin, one of the top Communist
theoreticians, once said something to the effect that it takes a
thousand people to build a bridge; it takes one person to blow it up.”
For a moment Tim thought he could feel the Caucus Room expand
with history and purpose. Something important was being offered for

discussion. But the senator and the witness soon returned to the
question of whether, on or around December 9, Adams had offered
to trade Cohn an air force scandal for the Fort Monmouth
investigation.
“Somebody is not telling the truth,” said Potter, reiterating what
had become his catchphrase.
“Somebody is certainly mistaken, sir,” responded Cohn. “It is
certainly not us, sir.”
“So,” said Potter, with the logic Tommy McIntyre had supplied him,
“perjury has been committed.”
“Well, sir,” answered Cohn, “somebody is certainly mistaken, and,
once again, sir, I am not.”
Tim noticed that Cohn might be denying no more than stupidity; he
had not denied lying—let alone denied that the eleven memoranda
over his name had been typed on an office machine he was never
even near.
When the session ended and the lights went down, the witness
gathered his papers and stood up just two feet from Tim, who still
occupied the seat Mrs. Potter had decided to pass up for an
afternoon’s shopping. Full of anger and a certain relief, as if he could
now shed a cloak that had made him itch unbearably, Cohn stepped
up to Tim’s left ear and whispered: “If your soldier-boy boss isn’t
careful, he may find that his balls go the way of his legs.” Not waiting
for McCarthy, he exited the room.
Tim said nothing, just stood there breathing a little hard over the
first words Cohn had ever spoken to him directly. When Tommy
came to collect the transcript he’d been working on, Tim repeated
Cohn’s remark.

“That’s nothing to worry about,” Tommy reassured him. “Charlie’s
balls are safe. They’re in my pocket.”
Tim frowned, prompting Tommy to complain. “What are you
stewing about? It was a good afternoon. For Charlie, for all of us.”
“I’m fine,” said Tim, who wanted to get out of the room as fast as
Cohn had. In exiting, he allowed himself one glance in Potter’s
direction and realized that Tommy was right: the senator appeared
perfectly content, pleased with the crispness of his own
performance. He wore the look of serene dignity that he could
maintain for hours at a time, the same expression he’d no doubt
worn when reading one of Everett Dirksen’s five unpublished novels,
a task he’d undertaken, he explained to Tim, “because Senator
Dirksen values my opinion.”
“Come on,” called someone from the crowded elevator car that
was just about to close. “You’re skinny enough to fit in!”
Tim emerged from his distraction to realize that the voice belonged
to McCarthy, who was forgoing, as he often did, the Senators Only
car. As Tim squeezed into place, he felt a gentle, almost fatherly,
hand on his shoulder. “Pete over there better not complain,” said the
senator, indicating the elevator operator. “Not when he’s owed me
ten bucks since Thanksgiving!” The tightly packed car, its
atmosphere perfumed with bourbon and a moment’s unforced
laughter, descended toward the street.

CHAPTER TWENTY

June 19, 1954
“Drink, Skippy.”
Tim downed two inches of the highball.
“More,” commanded Fuller.
“What’s it that people say? ‘It’s a little early in the day for this’?”
Tim pointed to the clock beside the radio.
“Eleven-forty-five a.m.,” said Fuller. “You think so?”
Tim drank more while Jo Stafford sang “Let’s Just Pretend.” He
looked away and said, softly, “You’re nice to let me come over,
Hawk.”
He’d arrived five minutes ago, in a state. He was calmer now, but
even so, Fuller decided to pull him a couple of inches lower onto the
couch cushions. He stroked the hair at Tim’s right temple with the
side of his index finger, the way one would a cat’s whiskers. Tim
turned to bury his face in the hollow of Hawkins’ neck, surprised by
the comfort he could take in the smell—amazed, really, that
something still so exotic and sought had also become familiar,
longstanding.
“Start again from the beginning,” Fuller said.
“I was at my desk by five after eight, I think—even though it’s a
Saturday.”
“Ah, yes, a workday. I seem to have forgotten.”

“I was working with the hearings transcript,” Tim explained. “The
part from Thursday, the very last day. The thirty-sixth day of all that.
And you know what I was realizing?” He took another swallow of the
highball. “How it’s always easier to follow the printed words from the
morning sessions. By the time things would get restarted in the
afternoon, a lot of them had put away three drinks at lunch. The
sentences would get longer and sloppier and angrier, even with Mrs.
Watt cleaning up what the stenographers took down. Anyway, there I
was a little while ago, typing out my boss’s closing remarks for a
couple of Sunday editors who are planning to run bits of what every
senator said.” Loosened by his own drink, he treated Fuller to some
pompous mimicry of Potter: “‘I wish to assure the American people
who are watching that this is not normal.’”
“Making fun of Citizen Canes!” said Fuller. “There’s hope for you
yet.”
Tim sat up straight but still clutched one of the pillows on the
couch. “And then of course there’s the big bombshell statement that
got him all the headlines. ‘There is little doubt that the testimony on
both sides was saturated with statements which were not truthful and
which might constitute perjury in a legal sense…. The staff of the
subcommittee will have to be overhauled.’ God! It’s been quoted so
many times I’ve got it by heart! All the Sunday editors think it’s in the
transcript, but you won’t find it there, Hawk. The ‘perjury’ and
‘overhaul’ stuff was in a statement Tommy McIntyre had me
mimeograph an hour before the close of the hearings. He passed it
out to the reporters without Potter ever having seen it, let alone
composed it. McCarthy went white when he got a copy! It’s what the
Democrats were hoping for all along—a Republican saying out loud
they’ve got to fire Cohn! Now there’ll be a vote to do that, and Potter
will join the Democrats and make it 4–3. He never would have said it
on his own, and he said no such thing in the hearing itself. Tommy
tricked him—but you know what? Potter kind of likes it. They’re
drawing him as a lion in the cartoons. He’s a big hero of free speech
and fair play now. And it’s all phony.” He shook his head and finished

off the drink. “All phony. Potter was more surprised by what he said
than McCarthy was. All phony.”
“Steady there, Skippy.” Hawkins took the empty glass and pulled
Tim back down on the couch. “Tell me when you heard the rifle shot,”
he said. “And tell me how you knew what it was. From all those
childhood moose-hunting trips up Ninth Avenue?”
“I didn’t know what it was. Except that it was unbelievably loud. I
checked the paper on the streetcar coming over here: the wind today
is north-northeast—perfect for carrying the sound from the SOB to
the Capitol. Honest, I thought the Bomb really had gone off.” The
week had begun with Operation Alert, a ten-minute civil-defense drill
that halted traffic across the city and saw white-armbanded marshals
herding pedestrians into the doorways of stores and office buildings.
“Senator Hunt got there at eight-thirty,” Tim continued. “He brought
the rifle from home, they’re saying, even though he always had a few
guns in his office. I got all this from Miss Cook, who went over there
to help out. Afterward.”
Tim’s agitation and gestures had subsided, but noticing how pale
he still looked, Fuller reached over to put the fan on a higher speed.
Along with its dry run for the apocalypse, Monday had brought the
beginning of an early, unbearable heat wave.
“Miss Cook says he moved some pictures of his daughter and son
from a bookcase to his blotter. Maybe so they’d be the last thing he
saw before he pulled the trigger. He did it sitting in his desk chair.
Miss Cook also says he left notes to everyone in his family and to
half the staff. And that just last week he sent his papers off to the
University of Wyoming archives.”
“The radio is saying it was his health. That he got bad news from
Walter Reed a couple of weeks ago.” Fuller spoke matter-of-factly,
making a casual effort to control Tim’s excitability—which, left to
itself, veered ungovernably, they both knew, between something that

charmed Fuller and repelled him. “Hunt did,” he pointed out, “quit the
race for a second time. The day after his physical, I think.”
“You don’t believe that, do you?” asked Tim.
“You mean me of all people?”
“Yeah, you, who’s always knocking me off the turnip truck. An hour
after it happened Hunt’s office put it out on the wire that he was
going to the hospital because of a ‘heart attack’! You remember what
happened with his son in Lafayette Park. How he got arrested for
trying to pick up a cop? Well, Tommy says a week ago Senator
Welker and Senator Bridges were letting Hunt know that if he didn’t
pull out of the reelection race his son’s record would be an issue.”
Hawkins, who had never told Tim about the lie-detector test
ordered up by Bridges’ protégé, Scott McLeod, pretended to laugh.
“‘How to Be a Man,’” he said cryptically, getting up to make a second
drink that he said they could split.
“You know what was the first thing I saw on my desk this
morning?” Tim asked. “A ‘subpoena.’ They made the invitation to the
farewell party look like one. Everybody was going to celebrate the
end of the hearings on Monday night, all together, Democrats and
the press included. I’ll bet Kenneth Woodforde would’ve been there,
knocking one back with Cohn. Well, now maybe they’ll be going to a
funeral instead. These stupid hearings.”
“They’re over, Timothy.” Hawkins returned to the couch with the
second highball. “They ended with a whimper. And a bang.”
“Yeah,” said Tim, taking the first big sip. “They’re over, and they
were about nothing. Or, as Welch would say, they were all about ‘the
’tis and the ’taint.’ Which puts it better than ‘Somebody is not telling
the truth.’ You know what? Nobody’s been telling the truth, my boss
included. And you know what else?” Tim asked, sitting up again to
project a louder indignation. “You know what Jenkins said at the

end?” He took a deep breath to begin a baritone imitation of the
Tennessee counsel: “‘Is it askin’ too much of inscrutable Fate to
hope that the paths of all of us will sometime cross again?’ Like he
wants to have a reunion, or start an alumni association. What a
dick.”
Hawkins laughed as loudly as Tim had ever heard him. “Now you’ll
be getting amorous, Skippy, because you always do when you’re
angry. And I don’t have a lot of time.”
The circles that had been under Tim’s eyes in April were gone, but
Hawkins noticed that his pupils were dilated almost to the point of
death. Even so, he could feel his belt being loosened. “Have you no
decency?” he asked, quoting the words that had gotten Welch so
many headlines and making them both laugh. “Have you at long last
no decency, sir?” He caressed the back of Tim’s head, which had
already gone to work on him, but after a minute he quietly withdrew,
pulling Tim up beside him. “Don’t finish me off,” he whispered. “We’ll
save things for another day.”
The last two words struck Tim’s ears like the gift he was never
allowed to take for granted, never permitted to expect. With “another
day” for once in the bank, he decided to borrow against it. “I came by
looking for you last night,” he admitted. “I know I’m not supposed to.”
He drank an inch of the second highball. “So where were you?” he
persisted.
“Early or late?” asked Hawkins.
“Let’s say early,” Tim answered, picking what might be the easier
answer to bear.
“At the Sulgrave Club. Near whose elevator, I may have told you,
Joe McCarthy once kicked Drew Pearson in the balls.”
“How did McCarthy even get in the door there?” Tim experienced a
short surge of ethnic fellow feeling. “A place like that must make him

feel like Martin Durkin.” People still joked that Ike’s Labor secretary, a
union man, had made for a cabinet of “eight millionaires and one
plumber.”
Hawk leaned over and kissed him. “Ah, the pluck of the Irish.”
“So who were you with there? Some Episcopal bishop?”
“Close. Joe Alsop.”
“Pardon me.”
Fuller turned serious, made his embrace more sheltering. “You say
the hearings were about nothing. Do you want to know what they
were about? I’ll tell you.”
Tim looked him in the eye. “Are you saying you know what Cohn
has on McCarthy? Did Alsop tell you what he was hinting at in that
column?”
“Cohn holds nothing over McCarthy,” said Hawkins. “Even Alsop
gets things wrong. But in the months since that column ran he’s
managed to get them half right.”
“What is it, then?”
“It’s what Schine has on McCarthy. Something a house detective
in one of the Schine family hotels saw Joe doing. And apparently
photographed.”
“Doing what?” asked Tim.
“Can’t tell you,” said Hawkins. “Because I don’t know, and neither
does Alsop. But it happened last fall, during one of those committee
trips to New York, when your Mr. Jones would play at being a
senator, and when old Joe was getting tired of Schine’s laziness, not
to mention a little wary and weary of the whole Roy-and-Dave show

and the rumors in the press. He was thinking about cutting Schine
loose. And then suddenly Schine—what is it that people say?
—‘knew too much.’”
“Well,” said Tim, “I guess the draft notice made everything moot.”
“No, the induction made things worse. All at once Schine would be
needing a slew of favors down at Fort Dix. And McCarthy was
powerless to refuse. The most he could do, when Cohn kept
pressing, was complain a little about Schine to Adams and some
others. But he never complained about him in front of Roy.”
“Because Roy would threaten him with what Schine had.”
“No. Roy doesn’t know that Schine has anything over Joe. He
thinks Joe went through two months of nationally broadcast hearings
because Joe sees Schine as the same paragon he sees. Love is
blind.”
“But as my grandmother still says, ‘The neighbors ain’t.’”
“Yes,” said Hawkins, “though some of them are a little too
fastidious to believe what they’re seeing.”
Tim was still struggling to work out the algebra of blackmail. “How
does Joe Alsop know?”
“Some smart reporter who owes him a favor gave him this story
that he’d half pieced together and couldn’t write because the other
half was missing.”
“How do you know Alsop? I never asked you.”
“People like us always know each other.”
Tim knew that “people like us” meant wealthy Protestants and not
secret homosexuals, but he still had to ask: “Is he in love with you?”

“Probably,” said Fuller. “But only enough to bat his eyes at me
from the other end of the chesterfield sofa. I’m given to understand
that he likes things a little rougher back in the bunkhouse.”
“What do you get out of it?”
“Excellent company,” said Hawkins. “Interesting information.”
“I guess you do have something on him,” said Tim, whose memory
of their conversation about Alsop’s column, swallowed up by the rest
of that catastrophic night in March, was now coming back.
“Plenty,” said Hawkins, who rested Tim’s head on his chest. He
began rubbing the boy’s back with long, insistent strokes that, for all
their strength, didn’t seem a prelude to anything.
“What are you doing?” Tim finally asked.
“Trying to stop your flesh from crawling.”
The answer, Tim thought, contained every part of Hawk’s feelings
toward him: protectiveness, affection, distance, enforcement. “How
to be a man,” Tim felt inspired to say, though he still didn’t know what
Hawk had meant by the words a little while ago.
“Yes,” said Hawkins. “A man of a certain kind.”
Tim hated hearing him say this. Not because he disputed his own
membership in the homosexual subspecies indicated by the phrase;
only because he hated being forced to acknowledge that God had
assigned Hawk to this same slum precinct in His creation.
“Well,” said Tim, eager to return the conversation to McCarthy, “I
guess I now know at least the half of it.”
“Less than half,” Hawkins replied. “You still don’t know what
McIntyre has on Citizen Canes.”

“That’s true.”
“Find out.”
“Why?”
“Despite whatever they taught you at St. Aloysius, knowledge isn’t
power. But it is insurance. Even Schine, who’s dumb as a post,
knows that much.”
“Tommy was in excelsis when things ended Thursday. But he
didn’t slow down for a second. Not even this morning. It’s the last
weekend of the primary campaign, and he says he’s going to keep
what they’re calling Jones’s ‘hidden vote’ well hidden. He was on the
phone even while the ambulance was leaving with Senator Hunt.
They must have heard the siren up in Maine, through the line.”
It was at this moment, when the half hour of Jo Stafford numbers
had concluded, that the radio announced the death of Wyoming’s
senior senator. Tim said nothing, just picked up the second highball.
“Gulp it, Skippy. I’ve got a date.”
Hawkins rose from the couch to put on a sport coat. After picking
up his keys, he seemed to realize that this was maybe a bit much
even for him. With a certain tenderness, he added: “It’s nothing,
Timothy. A friend I made during Monday’s ‘air raid.’ We were
escorted into the doorway of Quigley’s drugstore by one of the white
armbands.”
“A wartime romance,” said Tim, picking up his own jacket.
“There you go,” said Hawkins.

CHAPTER TWENTY-ONE

June 24, 1954
“Jesus, I can almost see Ike and Mamie. Behind the pink curtains.”
“No, that’s Kay Summersby on her knees. Mamie’s in the room
next door.”
“Walking into the walls.”
“Mrs. Eisenhower does not drink. She has an ‘inner-ear
imbalance.’”
Tim stood at the railing of the Hotel Washington’s rooftop terrace,
listening to this exchange between two reporters. They were pretty
plastered, and he was getting there, too. If not the life of this huge
party high above Pennsylvania Avenue, he was as loose-limbed as
he could reasonably be in the midst of his anxiety over whether
Hawk would show up.
The night was warm but breezy; the terrace’s awning flapped, and
the party’s din had banished most people’s memory of the service
conducted for Lester Hunt two days ago in the Senate chamber. Still,
his position at the railing prompted Tim, amidst all the drink and
shouting, to recall what he’d seen looking down from the gallery on
Tuesday: the impassive, straight-ahead expressions of Styles
Bridges and Herman Welker, not far from the white, papery face of
Hunt’s son.
The conversation in the gallery, like the whispers on the floor, had
concerned not the corpse, but the count. Once Wyoming’s
Republican governor picked a replacement for Hunt, the GOP would,
by a single seat, have a real majority. In politics, too, it seemed to

Tim, there was only excitement—and then everything else. Even at
the service, the Democrats had been thrilled by new peril; the
Republicans had been electric with fresh ascendancy.
The hearings’ farewell party had remained canceled, but the
formidable, impromptu combination of May Craig and Perle Mesta
had filled the void yesterday morning by announcing this party. The
invitations to it had pictured a Maine lobster with the face of Margaret
Chase Smith. Trapped in its claws was a tiny schoolboy figure meant
to stand for Robert L. Jones, who had gotten his comeuppance on
Tuesday night. Right now Tim could see the wide hat brims of both
Miss Craig, the Maine newswoman, and Mrs. Mesta, the eternal
arriviste and party-giver, clinking like martini glasses in a selfcongratulatory toast, even if the guest of honor, Senator Smith, had
demurely decided not to come.
Mrs. Mesta had provided her usual “mostes’”: the money and
social brass that rendered political affiliation or listing in the city’s
Green Book irrelevant to her recipe for a blowout. She and Miss
Craig might both be Democrats, but they were happy to be
celebrating the triumph of at least this one Republican (albeit over
another). Along with Estes Kefauver and Henry Jackson from the
Democratic side of the aisle, Jerry Persons and Jim Hagerty were
here from the White House, and everyone seemed equally pleased
about the real conquest being commemorated—Joe McCarthy’s
recent self-decimation.
Red roses—Mrs. Smith’s signature flower—bloomed atop each
tablecloth and drinks trolley. Posters with her winning slogan (“Don’t
Change a Record for a Smear”) depended from the flaps of the
awning. Standing near one of them, Tim heard Mrs. Persons and
Mrs. Hagerty loudly agreeing that Clare Boothe Luce, so refined—
and a genius, really—was a much better choice of female
ambassador than Mrs. Mesta had been. No wonder she’d been
posted to a real country like Italy instead of that toy one Truman had
sent Perle to. Liechtenstein? Luxembourg? Knock the Eisenhowers,

if you wanted: yes, purple orchids at state dinners might be putting
on the dog, but did people really wish to see Bess Truman back
stuffing daisies into vases she’d brought to the White House from a
Woolworth’s in Kansas City?
Tim tried to lose himself in this Washington version of the
conversations he remembered between the women of Ninth Avenue
when they reeled in the washlines between one apartment and
another. But he couldn’t keep himself from looking, every minute or
two, toward the entrance.
At one door to the terrace Tim could see only Bob Kennedy, who
seemed obliged to look ashamed of himself for being here at all,
while his wife, Ethel, loudly imitated the bark of Mrs. Mesta’s poodle,
Fifi. Kennedy began an attempt to reach the circle that had formed
around one of the evening’s great catches, Vermont’s Senator
Flanders, who’d continued in the past two weeks to up the ante
against McCarthy. Before the hearings ended, he’d strode into the
Caucus Room and, before the cameras, plunked down the text of a
motion he was about to make on the floor—one that would strip
McCarthy of his committee chairmanship. Flanders had explained
that the warning was a courtesy; McCarthy pronounced it a
combination of publicity-seeking and senility and urged that a net be
dropped over the Vermonter. Senator Mundt had settled for asking
Flanders to leave the room.
And yet, here he was, his nerve and his star still rising. People
now expected him to drop his motion in favor of one by which the
Senate would issue a blanket censure of McCarthy. Indeed, a feeling
had taken hold that the hearings might turn out to have been no
more than an exercise for actors who would soon be appearing in a
much larger drama.
Lyndon Johnson’s boys, Walter Jenkins and Bobby Baker, formed
part of the cluster around Flanders, though Baker, about as young as
Cohn, was really talking with Eddie Bennett Williams, another legal

prodigy and a buddy of Scott McLeod who was thought to make a lot
of money getting people security clearances. Williams was also a pal
of George Sokolsky, McCarthy’s Hearst columnist, and rumor had it
that he’d already been asked to undertake Joe’s defense again
censure.
Bobby Baker wanted to know whether this rumor was true, but
Williams’ answer was drowned out by the sudden crowing of Mrs.
Mesta—“You old rascal!”—her way of reminding the just-arrived
Drew Pearson that she’d forgiven him for all the nasty things he used
to write about Harry Truman. The ex-president and newspaperman
were now frequently in touch, not so much to bury the hatchet as to
plunge it jointly into McCarthy’s back.
“And you, too!” cried Mrs. Mesta, this time to Senator Kerr.
“Honey,” he replied, “you and Drew mighta been oil and water, but
me and you have always been oil and oil!”
“Oklahoma crude!” she roared back, offering their shared
geographical history as confirmation.
Senator Flanders now had competition no more than three feet
away. Joseph Welch had arrived and was talking to Miss McGrory,
whose last dispatch from the Caucus Room, after the attorney’s
have-you-no-decency speech, had been a kind of public love letter.
“After all this, can you really go back to Boston?” she asked.
“My dear young lady, can you really go back to the book page?”
Tim knew that he, too, would never again be what he had been,
and he knew it even more surely once he saw Hawk enter the room,
smile at him, and mouth the word “Skippy.” After smiling back, he
turned and looked the other way, behind him, toward the rooftop’s
railing, telling himself that if he leapt over it now he would die happy,

the mortal sin of suicide just a redundant count in God’s indictment,
earning him only a concurrent eternity in Hell.
Hawk approached with an improbable entourage: Mary Johnson
and the man who must be her fiancé, along with Mrs. Phillips and a
fellow Tim didn’t recognize. They all took drinks from a tray, a waiter
having glided instantly up to Hawk, just the way Tim remembered it
had gone at the restaurant in Charlottesville. With one hand Hawkins
selected a summery gin and tonic, and with the other he made a
discreet wave to Joe Alsop, who, engaged in conversation with Ike’s
press secretary, gave a businesslike one in return.
“Here,” said Hawk, presenting Tim to his companions, “is the real
source of your invitations.” In fact it had been a joyful, capering
Tommy McIntyre who’d pressed a fistful of Mrs. Craig’s invites upon
Fuller when he’d visited the office yesterday morning to talk to
Senator Potter about the St. Lawrence Seaway legislation.
“It’s nice to see you again,” said Mary Johnson, who reacquainted
Tim and Beverly Phillips before introducing him to Paul Hildebrand
and Jerry Baumeister.
“Mr. Fuller,” she explained to Tim, “is making us as impolitic as he
is.” Their boss, Mr. Morton, could hardly be displeased with the
results of the primary, but he would have discouraged their
attendance here, lest it appear that employees of the Congressional
Relations bureau had taken sides in a primary election.
Senator Gore’s chief of staff came over to greet Hawk, displacing
Tim from the circle of conversation. The new vantage allowed him to
watch the almost formal way in which Hildebrand held Mary
Johnson’s hand—a contrast to the easy exuberance of the arm Mr.
Baumeister kept draped over Mrs. Phillips’ shoulders.
“My mother,” Baumeister was telling Miss Johnson with a loud
laugh, “didn’t feel completely keen on my going out with a divorced
woman.”

Mrs. Phillips laughed, too. “Jerry is an excellent companion. A lot
more fun than the widower turned out to be.”
“And I got her a free window sash from the hardware store!”
Hawkins pulled Tim back into the group and away from an
oncoming conga line whose members were shouting the defeated
candidate’s campaign slogan, but adding the unheroic last lyric of
the song from which it had come: “The whole town’s talking about
the Jones boy…and he’s only nine days old!” On primary day the
youthful challenger had lost by five to one.
“Yes,” said Hawkins, “the hidden vote stayed hidden.” Senator
Gore’s aide replied that the only thing Mainers now had to worry
about was Nixon’s plan to vacation in the state.
“It’s usually good to keep things well hidden,” said Tim to Hawkins.
He realized that his level of inebriation had caught up to that of the
reporters at the railing. And being out in the open with Hawk, in a
setting so much more public than even the Charlottesville restaurant,
was making him giddy. Maybe he shouldn’t have said what he just
did, but Hawk seemed to get his meaning and laughed over it:
“There are all kinds of things hidden here.”
Fuller pointed to the figure of G. David Schine, who had entered
with an attractive girl Tim recognized as Iris Flores, one of the
private’s regular girlfriends; she had been interviewed in executive
session but never called upon to testify in public. In the closed
hearing she had described herself as an “inventor” trying to market
her latest brainstorm, a new-and-improved nylon brassiere strap.
Joe and Jean McCarthy might be home tending their wounds,
while Cohn burnt the midnight oil back in the office, but here, Tim
thought, was Schine, smiling—in uniform, no less—and being
mobbed, followed around by Dorothy Kilgallen, Hearst’s gossip
writer, who took down his every word.

“Mr. Fuller.” Tommy McIntyre, full of vigor and vim, gleaming with a
hard nonalcoholic brightness, approached Hawkins and shook his
hand. He displayed a certainty—apparent from the way he nodded at
both of them—that the connection between Mr. Fuller and “Master
Laughlin,” as he sometimes called him, was hardly casual.
Hawkins did nothing to disabuse him of the idea. “So where’s the
ostensible boss?” he asked, meaning Potter. Tim wanted to sink from
the hotel’s rooftop to its basement.
“Home in Arlington with the missus,” said Tommy, neither
surprised nor displeased by the query.
Tim tried not to stammer. “It would’ve been awfully hard for him to
come here. After all, he hired Mr. Jones.”
“And he fired him, too,” said Tommy. “We like Senator Potter
having things both ways. It’s this flexibility that gives him a certain
utility. “
A secretary from Senator Kefauver’s office came and pulled
Hawkins away. “Someone I want you to meet,” she said.
Tommy took the opportunity to tug Tim in the opposite direction.
“Look at them lappin’ it all up,” he said, tracing the whole senatorial
panorama with his glass of 7Up. “Some of the girls they’ve brought
along could get ’em charged under the Mann Act. Of course, their
aides have to settle for simpler pleasures, with smaller penalties.
Jenkins over there will be heading off any time now to the men’s
room at the G Street Y.”
Tim looked skeptically toward Lyndon Johnson’s executive
assistant, a family man by all accounts.
“Oh, yes,” said Tommy. “He’ll have time enough to make it back
here after a bit of relief—even if there’s got to be an arrest, a

booking, and a fifty-dollar fine in between. He’ll tell himself it was all
the fault of the alcohol.”
“I’m not doing so bad myself,” said Tim, nervously setting down his
highball.
“You look steady enough to me,” said Tommy, whose eyes were
now fixed on Private G. David Schine.
“I’m trying to remember which does what,” said Tim. “The Mann
Act and the Volstead Act, I mean.”
Tommy laughed. “The first one strives mightily to protect
underaged innocence. Oh, it’s a terrible law to be caught violating.”
After a pause, he added: “But set a thief to catch a thief.”
Tim pointed toward Iris Flores. “She certainly looks twenty-one.”
“Oh, she is,” said Tommy, baring yellow teeth as he laughed.
“That’s not Schine’s problem.”
Was it, Tim wondered, remembering Alsop’s information, someone
else’s problem? Perhaps a problem Schine knew McCarthy had?
Was Tommy on the verge of revelation? Tim had wondered for
months why the older man kept plying him with riddles. It had to be
more than Celtic fraternity or some sadistic impulse to harrow his
naïveté. But still there was no answer, and as always Tommy—now
making a clear-eyed beeline for Senator Flanders—was off even
more quickly than he’d materialized.
From behind, Tim heard a woman’s soft Southern voice beginning
to sing “Hey There.” He felt an ice-filled glass being pressed against
the back of his neck and realized it must be Mary Johnson. He
turned around and smiled. “Me with the stars in my eyes,” he sang in
return. “That ice felt good. Where’s Paul?”

“At a phone, ordering us a car. He figures we’ll never get a cab
downstairs.”
“You’re leaving so soon?”
Mary laughed. “It’s a miracle he lasted this long.”
Tim noticed the way she said it, as if Hildebrand’s prudential
nature might be troubling her more than Hawkins’ daredevil one.
“Would you let me make you dinner some night?” she asked.
“Really?”
“Really,” she assured him. “Just the two of us.”
“Of course,” he replied, knowing there would be a third,
incorporeal presence at her table. For the first time in his life he
would be talking to somebody about Hawkins Fuller, saying his
name, making judgments and speculations about him, offering
amusing stories in which he himself figured. But were there any
stories that Tim could actually tell? Ones that didn’t have nakedness
and the bedroom for their costume and setting? Banishing this
reverie, he spoke again at last: “Hawk got dragged away to meet
someone.”
“I know,” Mary said. “I was taken over there, too.” She pointed
toward a spot by the railing.
“Oh, my gosh,” said Tim, “that’s Mrs. Wilson!”
The widow of the twenty-eighth president remained plump and
pretty, sitting in a white metal garden chair atop this hotel whose
opening she had attended in 1917. He watched Hawk standing over
the former first lady, charming her. She was playfully swatting him
with a heavily ringed and braceleted hand, its adornments probably

having come wholesale from her first husband, Mr. Galt, whose old
jewelry store survived a few blocks away.
“No,” said Mary. “Fuller was taken to meet the one standing next to
her.”
Tim noticed a well-tailored blond girl alternating her gaze between
Hawk and Mrs. Wilson, smiling as if her life depended on it.
“She’s pretty,” said Tim.
“You think so?” asked Mary, who then seemed surprised by her
own cattiness. “Some distant relative of Senator Saltonstall’s,” she
explained. “Down from Massachusetts for a summer course at the
National Gallery. Lucy something-or-other.”

CHAPTER TWENTY-TWO

July 20, 1954
Dear Tim,
The christening will be at Church of the Holy Rosary on S.I.
(Jerome Ave.)—Sunday, Aug. 1, just after the 11:00 Mass.
There will be a little party afterwards, but we’ll expect you and
Mom and Dad for breakfast beforehand.
The baby is twice the size she was when you saw her, and
Mom (who I must say was a big help) has finally decided she
can go back to Stuy Town. All the middle-of-the-night crying
does make Tom very cross, which peeves me (since he’s not
around to hear it all day), but I suppose we’ll get through this
patch. (They say even Marilyn M. and DiMaggio are having their
troubles.)
What a strange Fourth of July! I was still woozy from the
anesthetic when you all got here…not exactly the holiday picnic
you’d been expecting when you came up from Washington.
Being a week early was the last thing I’d expected, but I was so
glad you were here to see Maria when she was brand-new.
We’d missed you at Easter, and at Mother’s Day, and on
Father’s Day, too. (I miss you period, brother. Or should I say
“godfather”!) Even on the Fourth, I could tell through the haze I
was in that you were eager to get back to the ferry and Penn
Station…eager to be far away. A week ago Mom told Dad
there’s a kind of veil between you and the world these days,
which made me think of that flimsy old curtain (a “scrim”?) on
the stage in the Holy Cross auditorium. Mom says she’s sure
you leave more out of your letters than you put in.
Grandma Gaffney heard all this between Mom and Dad and
put a stop to their conversation by squawking: “If Timmy’s got
something to tell you, he’ll tell you.”

So tell us. I don’t want to pressure and pester you, but you are
my baby brother, not to mention Maria’s godfather, and I worry
about you. Think about clueing me in a little…even if you are a
government bigshot now.
With love from Frances, Tom, and Maria Loretta
XXX
P.S. Grandma G. says the baby’s name “makes her sound like a
dago.”
The pages of Francy’s letter now lay, limp with lunchtime humidity,
on Tim’s office desk. Realizing he still wasn’t ready to respond, Tim
folded the letter and put it into his left pants pocket, the right one
already being occupied by a postcard he’d received from Maine,
where Hawkins would be staying until August 1. As the baby’s
godfather, he could hardly miss going up to Staten Island that day,
but in truth, he’d give almost anything to remain in Washington, on
the chance he might be allowed over to I Street for a first-night-back
reunion.
The approaching click of Potter’s canes, along with the highpitched voice of Tommy McIntyre, made Tim clear the remains of a
sandwich and its wax paper from his blotter. Returning from a closed
lunchtime session of the subcommittee, the senator and Tommy
were pulling a small entourage of reporters, including Kenneth
Woodforde, into the office.
“A Pulitzer!” Tommy cried. “A Pulitzer to the first photographer who
gets a shot of Cohn saluting Zwicker!”
McCarthy had scheduled a subcommittee meeting to investigate
reports of subversion at a Boston defense contractor, but the
Democrats had wrested away the agenda, and Potter, by voting with
them, had just created a 4–3 majority forcing the resignation of Roy
Cohn. The committee counsel was now expected to begin his own

long-deferred military service in the National Guard at Camp Kilmer
—under the very general that McCarthy, back in February, had
pronounced “not fit to wear the uniform.”
For a second, Tim’s mind went longingly back to General Airlie
and the rest of the spectating brass that Mr. Welch used to assemble
in the Caucus Room, but another burst of glee from Tommy put an
end to any daydreaming. “Dave and Royboy will be wearing the
same shade of khaki now!” he shouted. Senator Potter tried to
project dignity against Tommy’s merriment, concluding whatever
remarks he’d been making to Woodforde by stressing “the
importance of getting back to serious investigations, ones that will
respect people’s rights while uncovering the truth. You know, Mr.
Woodforde, these Communists are real.”
“Since you acknowledge their reality,” Woodforde asked, “does
that mean you’re now ready to recognize Red China?”
Potter looked baffled.
“Wise guy,” said Tommy.
“Can’t blame me for trying,” replied Woodforde, who closed his
notebook and let the two other reporters proceed without him to
Potter’s inner office.
“There’s more of them to recognize all the time,” said Tim, once he
realized he’d been left alone with Woodforde. “Communists, I mean.”
“Thanks to magazines like The Nation?” asked Woodforde.
“Well, yeah, actually. It looks as if we’ve now got twelve million
more to recognize in Indochina.” A peace conference at Geneva,
following the Communist victory at Dien Bien Phu, was about to
divide Vietnam in two.

“You mean those twelve million people who’d be so much happier
and freer being ruled by the French?”
“Yeah, those,” answered Tim, trying to speak with a smile. “The
ones who are having their new country designed by Molotov.”
“Two new countries,” Woodforde reminded him.
“Right. Korea, Germany, China, now Vietnam. All those big half
loaves, and the Communists always stay hungry.”
“The Communists will be evacuating South Vietnam within ten
months,” said Woodforde, reciting what had been pledged at
Geneva.
“You don’t believe that, do you?” asked Tim. “Or that they won’t kill
any more French priests in the meantime?”
“None that don’t have it coming.”
Tim shook his head and turned on the radio, not in any real display
of anger, just to make plain that he couldn’t continue a conversation
in this vein.
Over the airwaves, the voice of Roy Cohn was explaining the toll
that this past year had taken on his parents in the Bronx. Senator
Potter, tape-recorded ten minutes earlier, was wishing him well. A
statement from McCarthy’s office, just released and now being read
by the announcer, struck a less forgiving note: “The resignation of
Roy Cohn must bring great satisfaction to the Communists and
fellow travelers. The smears and pressures to which he has been
subjected make it clear that an effective anticommunist cannot long
survive on the Washington scene.”
Woodforde was smiling—over this formulation that might soon
become McCarthy’s epitaph for himself—when a colleague from

U.S. News stuck his head in the door: “Come on down. Flanders is
starting his speech.”
Woodforde waved for Tim to join them in the gallery. “Here’s
something we can all agree on, no?”
Still uncertain about the censure movement, Tim nonetheless felt
glad of a truce and agreed to accompany the two reporters. He fell in
step beside Woodforde, wondering as they double-timed it down the
corridor why some part of him felt drawn to this left-wing provocateur.
The gallery was more crowded than the floor. Democrats—worried
about appearing overeager—were thin on the carpeted ground
below press and spectators. But rhetoric was soon off to the races.
Flanders invited his colleagues to consider “the Senator as Führer,”
even if that role had come to McCarthy “without conscious intention
on his part.” A chance for Joe to change his ways was being offered,
the Vermonter insisted, “in a spirit of Christian charity.”
“See,” Woodforde whispered to Tim. “Even the priests approve.”

“Paul says it’s over a hundred degrees in St. Louis.”
“I guess we shouldn’t complain,” said Tim.
Mary Johnson, who’d had to persuade the boy to remove his
seersucker jacket, fluffed the chicken hash on the burner and
disagreed. “Oh, sure we should complain.”
“Doesn’t it get even more steamy than this in New Orleans?” Tim
asked.
“They know how to build shade there. We used to spend half the
day in the dark, behind the shutters.”

She looked at him as he set out the plates and napkins, and had
trouble believing he would spend half his life like that, hiding in
shadows. He reminded her a little of Lon McCallister, that slight,
sweet actor who’d had to kiss Katharine Cornell in Stage Door
Canteen and had just walked away from the movies at thirty. Right
now she herself felt a little like the grand Miss Cornell, or at least Our
Miss Brooks, though she couldn’t be more than a few years older
than Tim.
“So, have you heard from him?” she was suddenly moved to ask.
He brightened up as if they’d decided to go straight to dessert.
“A postcard from Bar Harbor,” he answered, reaching for it in his
pocket. “‘Dear Skippy,’—that’s a nickname he has for me—‘Nothing
up here but the Bucksport papers, and even they still echo with
praise for Citizen Canes.’ That’s what he calls my boss. ‘I won’t
return until the first, by which time an air conditioner is supposed to
be installed in every front window of 2124 Eye Street. You can come
over when you need to get that scapular unstuck from your
overheated skin. Sheen’s TV show, by the way, doesn’t reach these
parts, so Mother will have to remain in the clutches of the
Reformation for a while. HF.’”
She saw his face contract with embarrassment as he finished—not
because it was too much; because it was too little. Where were
“love” and “wish you were here,” or even a double entendre about
the lighthouse pictured on the front of the card? The scapular might
suggest intimacy, but of a small, controlled sort, a rationing prompted
not by fear of the postman’s prying eyes, but wariness of the boy’s
ravenous heart.
She had to give him the chance to display his feelings, had to
force herself to say some words that would allow that: “You must
miss him.”

The gratitude on his face was immediate, though he stopped short
of saying anything.
“We even miss him in the office,” she declared, helpfully. “Though,
of course, he is impossible.”
“He is, isn’t he?” said Tim, whose laughter was still more nervous
than relieved. As if remembering his manners—and that he ought to
share such pleasure—he asked: “Is Paul impossible, too?”
Mary thought for a moment. “Paul is, I’d say, very…possible.”
Tim smiled. “Is that a compliment?”
“Possibly.” She doubled her Southern accent to keep him amused,
while realizing that this was not a question she wanted to entertain.
“Okay,” she said, “the hash is finally hotter than the room.” She
poured a tumbler of ice water for herself, and a glass of milk for him.
He reached for it quickly, as one would for a ringing telephone. “Did
he tell you that? About the milk-drinking, I mean.”
“Yes,” said Mary, glad to give him this small, additional thrill,
though in truth, while Fuller might be indiscreet about the boy’s
existence, he never said too much about Tim himself.
She had gone as far as she could in one night. She could not take
conversation about Fuller, let alone Paul, any further. But what else
could she ask this boy about? He had less ambition than any young
man she’d ever met in Washington. He already had a career—a
vocation, she supposed—in Hawkins Fuller.
“So,” she said, resorting to a topic of the day, and a question that
didn’t come out as well as it might have. “Do you think the army will
make a man out of Roy Cohn?”

The Sand Bar’s piano player started in on “Some Enchanted
Evening,” and Tim ordered a bottle of Senators beer. He couldn’t
remember the one that Mary’s fiancé brewed, but this would do fine.
And he’d be fine here. He had heard Hawk mention this place once
or twice, and he’d decided to walk all the way to it from Mary’s
apartment.
As exciting as it had been to talk with her about Hawk—and as
grateful as he’d been for the permission—he had ended the evening
feeling like a specimen, a sympathetic object of study. Mary seemed
to recognize the same thing herself, and just as clearly to regret it,
but her own attempts at being natural had somehow made things
worse. In saying goodbye, she’d apologized for any awkwardness
and expressed the hope that their dinner might be considered “a first
try”—thereby heightening, once more, the atmosphere of scientific
inquiry. However appealing she might be, he’d been relieved to get
back out onto the streets of Georgetown, and now, a half hour later,
to this bar in Thomas Circle. The place was bringing him a step
closer to Hawk, the way smelling one of his shirts might do, were he
only permitted entry into the I Street apartment while Hawk was
away.
Two stools to his left, a slightly built man with dyed hair and
plucked eyebrows nodded to him. He nodded back and, never
having been by himself in a bar—let alone this kind of bar—worried
that he might have just given a signal that was open to
misinterpretation. As soon as his bottle of beer arrived, he got up,
deciding to drink it against the wall at the other side of the room. But
the man with plucked eyebrows shook his head and pointed to a sign
behind the bar. NO DANCING. NO CARRYING DRINKS.
Tim mouthed the word “thanks” just as the man’s friend returned
from the bathroom.
“You’re crazy,” said the man, resuming the argument he and his
friend had evidently been having.

“I am not—I repeat not,” said the bulkier friend, “putting in for
promotion.”
“You work at the Interior Department, Donald, not the Atomic
Energy Commission.”
The bartender, to keep them from exploding at each other, began
to sing “Don’t Fence Me In.”
“They still investigate,” said the Butch One, as Hawk would have
called him.
The fairy rolled his eyebrowless eyes and said nothing.
“There’s a Master List,” the bigger one insisted. “Of us.”
“No, there’s not,” said the fairy.
“Behave,” the bartender instructed him. “He’s the daddy.”
The two of them walked off toward the jukebox, leaving their drinks
where they were. The piano player was starting his break, so they
put in a nickel for “How High the Moon.”
The bartender, well-muscled and weatherbeaten, pointed to the
Butch One and speculated to Tim: “I guess when you’ve managed to
get out of Rich Square, North Carolina, you figure you don’t need to
be promoted on top of things. Where are you from?”
“New York City,” said Tim.
“Ah,” replied the bartender. “A hard case.” Meaning, Tim guessed,
that there was no place any bigger he could escape to, no
anonymous haven where he could be himself and—as he so
obviously needed to—relax.
Across the room a skinny Negro scolded his white boyfriend: “You
do so know. My black taffeta with the pleats!”

With a tilt of his head, the bartender signaled a bouncer to eject
the overexcited colored boy. Tim couldn’t hide a certain relief and
maybe even his feeling that justice was being done by the regulation
of such effeminacy. The bartender, he knew, could see him pining for
normality, for the chance to believe he still lived with the rest of the
world.
“It was more fun in here ten years ago,” the barman assured him.
“Soldiers every night. Of every stripe and kind.”
The cat still had Tim’s tongue, and the bartender made one more
attempt: “Let me guess. He’s married. Or ambisextrous?” Tim
laughed a little.
“Bingo,” said the bartender, moving away to mix someone else’s
drink. “Relax, apple pie,” he said by way of farewell. “But be careful
who you talk to.”
Tim wondered about the advice: Might someone actually hurt him?
Maybe there was a Master List? Could the Negro’s boyfriend, or
even the guy with no eyebrows, actually be an informant?
He stayed only another minute. While riding the streetcar home,
passing the Star’s building on Pennsylvania, he reached over the
open window to clean his hands in the raindrops that a
thundershower had left upon the glass. Then he dried himself with
his handkerchief, not wanting to smudge the ink when he took
Hawkins’ postcard, once more, from his pocket.

CHAPTER TWENTY-THREE

September 8, 1954
The defense of Joe McCarthy against censure had begun presenting
itself this morning, but the senator’s talented young lawyer, Edward
Bennett Williams, still seemed to be spending the bulk of his effort on
keeping his client quiet. As to the allegation that McCarthy had
abused General Zwicker during the subcommittee’s February
hearings in New York, Williams had so far offered only the testimony
of a salesman who’d taken a tourist’s peek at that day’s brief open
session and could report that he had heard General Zwicker, under
his breath, refer to the junior senator from Wisconsin as a son of a
bitch. Which, it was now implied, had justified all that followed.
The censure hearing now stood in lunchtime recess, so Tim
lowered the radio on his desk and ate his sandwich. He looked out
the window at the Capitol lawn, still strewn with tree branches blown
down the other day by Hurricane Carol. Mary Johnson’s little kitchen
window, which Tim was now used to sitting beside through long,
difficult conversations about Hawkins Fuller and Paul Hildebrand,
had lost a pane of glass during the storm, whereas at Hawk’s
apartment, where Tim spent the hurricane’s worst hours, the loud
hum and rattle of the new air conditioner had blunted one’s
awareness that anything unusual was happening outside.
The appliance, extravagantly extolled by Hawk, was never off.
“Are we doing this just to keep warm?” Tim had laughingly asked
while they had sex one unseasonably cool, but still air-conditioned,
night. “That’s always the reason for doing this,” Hawk responded,
leaving unclear whether he was referring to his own low emotional
temperature or the futility of all human endeavor.

Over the past month, Tim had actually been allowed to spend the
night a couple of times. On these occasions, for long stretches Hawk
would hold him close, ostensibly against the air conditioner’s cold.
But even so, Mrs. Mesta’s party remained the last time they’d been
out in public together, and Tim still knew never to come over
unannounced, or with groceries, or to answer the phone without
being told to.
“Well,” said Tommy McIntyre, now hurrying into the office, “old
Joe’s hand just shook when he swore the oath.”
Tim put the radio back on; the recess was over, and there would
be no muzzling the defendant now that, at his own insistence, he’d
taken the witness stand.
“It’s a shame the republic has any other business!” crowed Tommy,
whose enjoyment of McCarthy’s travails was undiminished. “But your
friend Mr. Fuller will be here a little later, about something entirely
different.”
“My friend?” asked Tim, reflexively lying.
“He’s coming over with his boss, Morton. The great solon”—
Tommy pointed to Potter’s office—“is on their docket once again.
They’re all supposed to fret about our majority leader’s brilliant
suggestion that we break off relations with Russia.” Walking away,
Tommy added, in regard to Fuller: “Just thought you’d like to know.
Anticipation being the pleasure it is.”
Hawkins and Mr. Morton arrived at the high point of McCarthy’s
testimony about General Zwicker. The director of Congressional
Relations went in to see Potter on his own, while Fuller sat down on
the edge of Tim’s desk and began listening to the radio.
“Did you say ‘not fit to wear the uniform’?” asked Edward Bennett
Williams.

“No,” McCarthy answered. “I said he was not fit to wear the
uniform of a general.”
Tim cracked up. “The Jesuits would love that, Hawk!”
Fuller smiled.
Looking at him, Tim tried to imagine Hawkins years from now, with
a pipe, the two of them seated in front of the radio after dinner. It
was, he knew, a fantasy more ridiculous than any plot ever featured
on Mr. Keen, but the thought of it warmed him while debate
continued over Zwicker’s uniform. Tim thought of Hawk’s old navy
dress whites hanging in the closet on I Street; once or twice he’d felt
the urge to put them on, not to partake of their owner’s godlike
aspect but to assume the mantle of simple masculine normality, the
movie-and-magazine ideal he remembered from his own, presexual
World War II.
It was more fun in here ten years ago. Soldiers and sailors every
night. Of every stripe and kind.
A burst of whistling issued from Tommy McIntyre. Indifferent to the
business between Potter and Morton, he’d returned to the outer
office and cranked up the volume of the radio. “So, are the two of
you having supper together?”
“No,” Tim hastily answered.
“Good,” said Tommy, turning his face to Hawkins. “I need Mr.
Laughlin to dine with me.”
“Be my guest,” said Fuller.
The response, however casual, still implied that the permission
was Hawk’s to give, and the answer excited Tim all afternoon, long
after Hawk had left. He was still feeling a nervous pride from the

exchange when he and Tommy arrived at O’Donnell’s, down on E
Street.
They ordered the filet of sole, though Friday remained two days
away, and Tommy began their conversation with the news that
Howard Rushmore, an ex-Communist who for a little while had been
the subcommittee’s research director, had just become the editor of
Confidential magazine. “He was always pushin’ a story about Mrs.
Roosevelt and her nigger chauffeur. Well, maybe that legend of love
will finally see the light of print!”
Tim stared at the tines of his fork and figured Tommy would soon
get to the point of their being here.
After a long pause, the older man asked: “You know how he
perspires when he walks?”
Tim knew that he meant Potter. “Yes.”
“He did even then. Years before the legs were gone. I saw him do
it in ’38.”
Oh, I’ve known Mr. McIntyre for years.
“He was already trying to date Lorraine,” Tommy continued. “Her
old man was a fish dealer, a big wheel in town, and Charlie wasn’t
getting anywhere. Not as a potato farmer’s son who’d been working
in a cannery to put himself through State Normal College in Ypsilanti.
He’d wanted to go to law school, but no dough, and he’d ended up a
social worker in Cheboygan.” Tommy finished off his 7Up. “I think he
sweated from sheer strain, from the dull mighty effort he gave
everything. I remember seeing him one afternoon from behind a big
empty crate on Huron Street. His face was drenched.”
“What were you doing there?”

“Sleeping. Living. It was my first stay on what’s demotically known
as Skid Row, though in Cheboygan I never skidded. I stuck to the
fish paste on the sidewalk.” With a look, he indicated that there was
no need for Tim to ask questions. The story would come, unbidden.
“I’d been a reporter for three papers in Detroit, at least when I
wasn’t drinking. But at that point I’d been drinking since ’36, when I’d
done a little work for somebody’s campaign for governor, can’t
remember whose. Can’t remember any of that besides getting
knocked around pretty badly by some boys from the other side.”
He told the waiter to bring Tim a second old-fashioned. “And
another 7Up for myself.” Tim half understood that he was supposed
to drink tonight, in some act of surrogacy. Tommy looked at the
arriving old-fashioned in a way that suggested he was perilously
close to falling off the wagon.
“Yes,” he said, crunching a bread stick with his yellow teeth, “we
were both fine citizens of Cheboygan, Michigan. He stayed stuck in
the social-aid bureau and got to supervising it by the time he went off
to the war. But that was later.” Tommy crunched the bread stick. “In
’38 he was my caseworker, though they called it something else
back then.”
“Was he unfair to you?” asked Tim, fearing the winds of what he
now realized was an epic, ancient enmity.
“He was as just as Judge Hardy!” cried Tommy, with a laugh. “No,
let me clarify that. He was just to me.” His mottled face contracted
with anger. “Not to her.”
Tim knew he wasn’t referring to the future Mrs. Potter.
“Annie Larchwood,” said Tommy. “She’s still alive, though she
barely knows it. She’s a drinker, too. Became one after her husband,
Mike—an organizer, a Communist—got forced off his job on the line.
Need I say, Master Timothy, that he drank as well? He walked out on

her on his way to hell. Died from the stuff. I met Annie at his funeral.
Amplification: I fell in love with her at his funeral.”
Tommy’s skull looked like a grenade. Tim tried to signal that he
was paying close attention, as if that might keep the pin from being
pulled.
“She went on relief, and soon enough got to the end of the money.
To keep the checks coming, she pulled some kind of fast one, and
straight-arrow Charlie, who ran her case, too, cut her off. But then, in
a moment of weakness, when he was despairing over the
fishmonger’s daughter, he put her back on the rolls. After she agreed
to sleep with him.”
Tommy’s contempt was total—it embraced Potter’s rectitude as
much as his lapse.
“She gave in and got knocked up with the son Mike had never
managed to give her. The snot-nosed little issue turned fourteen last
year.”
Tim thought it an odd formulation. Last year?
“When I brought him to New York,” Tommy added. “He’s a filthy
punk, though he has his uses. Drink up.”
For the moment Tommy would go no further. In the brief silence,
Tim swallowed more of the old-fashioned. Then he asked: “What
makes you hate McCarthy so much?” It seemed the logical next
question; with his loathing for Potter now explained, Tommy could
move on to the next titanic grudge inside him.
The analysis that followed turned out to be patient, almost
professorial. “All of Annie Larchwood’s troubles began with the
hounding of her red husband, a better man than McCarthy or
Zwicker. All of Annie’s troubles continued with Charlie, who’s one of
nature’s blind little do-gooders. No,” he said, noting the puzzlement

on Tim’s face, “I’m not some old aggrieved Commie with a pious
beef. In fact, I’d make a pretty good anarchist; I told that to
Woodforde the other day.” He took a second and last forkful of fish.
“What I am mostly is a drunk, whether or not I’m drinking. Same way
you’re a Catholic, whether or not you’re taking Communion. Which
these days, I suspect, you’re not.”
“I hate Communists,” said Tim, trying to change the subject.
“Of course you do,” said Tommy, sweetly mocking.
“Does Senator Potter know he has a son?”
“Senator Potter knows what I tell him,” barked Tommy, before
resuming the mode of earnest tutelage. “Yes, I did have the pleasure
of imparting that news when I began helping the staff. Let’s say that
the possession of such knowledge has helped me to make our great
solon somewhat useful where the junior senator from Wisconsin is
concerned.”
Tommy finished the last of his 7Up, and with a tap of his index
finger commanded Tim to keep going on the old-fashioned. “Oh, it’s
not as if no one’s got nothing over me. Joe and Royboy know I got
imposed on Charlie by the automobile fellas, to keep him voting on
the straight and narrow. Yes, I gave the auto men a prior decade of
sober service, in the papers and in campaigns.”
Everybody’s money comes from someplace, Senator. Everybody’s
people come from someplace. Tim remembered the quick threat to
Potter, the poisoned meat in the sandwich of bonhomie that
McCarthy had served that afternoon last March. Tommy would have
heard the remark from the outer office, where he’d decided to wait.
“But Joe and Roy don’t know I got myself imposed on Charlie for
my own particular motives. And they don’t know I’ve got something
far bigger on them than they’ve got on yours truly.”

There would be no further explanation tonight. Tim reached for a
peppermint and kept his eyes on the tablecloth. “Why did you tell me
all this?” he asked at last.
“Because I’ve seen you looking at Mr. Fuller. And I know that your
life will be given to his as surely as Annie Larchwood got mine. I told
you because you’ll understand.”
Tommy pushed aside the just-brought coffee and leaned into the
table. His eyes shone with a brutal sympathy, letting Tim know that,
from this moment on, for the foreseeable future, he lived not just in
Hawkins’ clutches, but in Tommy McIntyre’s, too.
“I should go,” Tim said, weakly.
“Use it for a taxi,” said Tommy, refusing Tim’s dollar bills. “I know
where you’re headed.”
When he got to I Street, his head off-kilter from the old-fashioneds,
Tim looked up and saw that the apartment was dark. He wondered if
he should sit on the steps and wait until Hawk returned with some
weeknight conquest. For a few minutes he stood on the sidewalk,
trying to decide, until he felt an enormous, unexpected surge of
anger. In his mind’s eye, Hawk was bobbing atop the clean blue
ocean in his pressed naval uniform, while he himself was being
dragged to its weed-choked depths.
Drunk as he was, he could feel the hint of autumn in the air. A
“School’s Open Drive Carefully” poster flapped against the
streetlamp. NO DANCING. NO CARRYING DRINKS.
He walked up the building’s steps and, once inside the vestibule,
took down the super’s posted instruction that tenants keep their new
air conditioners pitched at a five-degree angle toward the street;
drips were damaging rugs and seeping into floorboards. On the back
of the paper, he wrote a note to leave in Hawkins’ mail slot:

You said knowledge is insurance. Against what? The chance
that somebody might turn out to be what he appears to be? That
somebody might not own somebody else? I’ll never own you, no
matter how many times I hum “You Belong to Me” in the shower.
But I belong to you—whether you like it or not.
After the cab ride, he had no money for even the streetcar. And so
he walked all the way home, miles, wishing he could sing in his
chains like the sea.

CHAPTER TWENTY-FOUR

November 10, 1954
With crowds to be controlled at both the eastern and western
approaches to the city, the District of Columbia police found
themselves split in two on the morning before Veterans Day. Across
the Potomac, on Arlington Boulevard, Nixon was dedicating the Iwo
Jima Memorial, and at Union Station trains were disgorging
hundreds of riders wearing “Make Mine McCarthy!” buttons. They
also carried placards (“Twenty Years of Treason!” “Joe Knows!”) that
sprang to sudden, vertical life once they hit the platform and began
marching to Capitol Hill. By eleven a.m. the corridors of the Senate
Office Building looked more like the floor of a nominating convention.
Debate on the censure resolution was at last under way, and though
things appeared to be moving in Senator Flanders’ direction, he
elected to remain behind locked doors.
Over in the Capitol building, two brightly colored items sat on Tim’s
desktop: the emerald-covered report that was now driving the
censure debate toward a vote, and an oversized birthday card for
Senator Kennedy, still recovering from back surgery in New York.
Festooned with greetings from the SOB, it now awaited Potter’s
signature here in the Capitol.
Miss Cook approached Tim’s desk, sighing: “That colored
corporal’s family is here. In the conference room.”
Tim looked at his watch. As they’d feared, Potter had failed to
make it back in time from the Iwo Jima dedication.
“Plan B,” said Tim, rushing off to the House cloakroom to press
Congressman Rhodes into service.

Corporal James Borum, a young Washingtonian who had enlisted
in the Marines in ’48 and died three years later in a North Korean
prison camp, had no connection with Rhodes’s home state of
Arizona, but once the congressman arrived in the conference room
near Potter’s office, there was at least an elected official who could
present a flag and decoration to the boy’s family.
Corporal Borum had no connection to Michigan, either, but from
time to time Potter’s interest in North Korean atrocities still broke
through the McCarthy drama like a weak, overlapping signal on the
radio dial. The senator’s office had lately decided to honor this
soldier, who had only this year been officially declared dead.
A grandmother, Mrs. Drumming, along with a brother and an aunt,
stood mute and respectful while Rhodes read the citation, though it
was apparent they would have preferred James Borum’s corpse,
never released by the North Koreans, to a medal. Tim also believed
he could detect in the brother’s face an awareness that the family,
told Senator Potter had been caught in traffic, was somehow being
honored and insulted all at once.
Tim wondered if he was supposed to say something about “a
grateful nation,” but when he shook Mrs. Drumming’s hand, he
wound up whispering, “I’m sorry for your trouble,” the words he’d
heard murmured at every Irish wake he’d ever been to.
And with that, embarrassed and relieved, he dashed off to the
Senate gallery.
The chamber was in an uproar. Desks were being pounded, as
refusals to yield reached the ceiling of the packed gallery, where all
eyes stayed on Jean McCarthy, sitting very straight under a statue of
John Tyler. Her smile, Pepsodent bright, was the same one she’d
had for the cameras the day she came back from New York with her
broken leg and Robert Jones announced his Senate candidacy.

As the debate moved toward a climax, her husband moved
irretrievably beyond his lawyer’s control. McCarthy’s buzzing
declamations stirred the reporters’ pens and thrilled the nerves of his
supporters: “It is not easy for a man to assert that he is the symbol of
resistance to Communist subversion, that the nation’s fate is in some
respects tied to his own fate. It is much easier, I assure you, to be
coy, to play down one’s personal role in the struggle for freedom.”
No, he would not let this cup pass. He would meet his end
insisting that he and freedom were one and the same. Coyness was
for others; it had been for Welch; it had been for Zwicker. Don’t be
coy with me, General…“I take it you would rather I be frank, that you
would rather acknowledge and accept the fact that McCarthyism is a
household word for describing a way of dealing with treason and the
threat of treason.”
“And so it is,” muttered one antagonist next to Tim.
“And so I shall,” declared McCarthy.
His citizen followers, their placards checked at the door to the
gallery, remained hopeful, but his dwindling corps of legislative allies
was already thinking of what-might-have-beens. After the army
hearings, when Eddie Williams began constructing a legal strategy,
Senator Dirksen had tried to start a rehabilitation campaign, but none
of the town’s best public-relations men smelled success in the client
being proffered.
If the vote goes against him, Tim thought, his followers will act as if
there’s been a coup d’état, and they’ll summon the whirlwind to fill
the vacuum. He looked over at Jean McCarthy, whose expression
had not changed, and he decided to get some air on the Capitol
steps.
Outside, he sat down behind a woman reading about Dr.
Sheppard’s murder trial in a copy of the Daily News that had been
discarded by one of the demonstrators from New York. Was there,

Tim wondered, more eternal verity in that story—the philandering
doctor who’d butchered his wife—than in this one? Weren’t Tommy
McIntyre’s politics dictated and trumped by his romantic obsession?
Kenneth Woodforde, Tim suspected, was an actual Communist.
But as such he would at least be a believer in something—as
opposed to Hawk, who believed in nothing, or Senator Potter, who
believed what he was told to. And as opposed to himself, a believer
in contradictions: that McCarthy was the devil doing the Lord’s work;
that Christ was Lord and yet His laws could be disobeyed.
Maybe real belief required imprisonment, or at least regimentation.
The POWs testifying before Potter had felt their bodies transformed
into organisms of certainty and faith—Out of that many men, nobody
cracked—by the very torture that had sought to break them. General
Airlie, perhaps never beaten or shot, nonetheless seemed to have a
creed that had been spit-polished into honest, unwavering sureness.
Which, Tim wondered, did he himself miss more? God’s love or
His authority? Where could he go—to what secular church—to turn
himself in?
He looked up at the nearest flagpole on the Capitol roof. Unlike on
the afternoon he’d been hired, nothing flew on it, not even
momentarily; no banner for Mill Valley, none for Cheyenne. No
reason to put his hand on his heart.

“Stormed at with shot and shell! Mildly they rode and—well? So
much for the ten thousand six hundred.”
Raising his glass, Fuller finished this brief Tennysonian tribute to
the 10,600 State Department employees around the world who had
by now, according to a quote from Scott McLeod in the Evening Star,
all been through the new security procedures.

“Yes,” said Mary, cutting into the last of her steak. “But only the
most elite troops have been through the Miscellaneous M Unit.”
“We happy few. We band of inverted brothers.”
She winced.
“You started it,” said Fuller.
“I know, I know,” she said, returning his smile and wondering why
she should be bothered by a direct admission of his being queer.
She wondered, for that matter, why she was out having dinner with
him here at Harvey’s. And she wondered most of all why she
continued to string out her engagement to Paul, as if they were
Victorian cousins waiting on an inheritance.
No, she was not, “in spite of everything,” in love with Fuller. She
had searched her feelings, honestly, in that department. Then what
was it?
“So, how are the capital’s cutest couple?” asked Hawkins.
He meant Jerry Baumeister and Beverly, who now went
everywhere together.
“Inseparable,” Mary answered.
“Good for them.”
“You mean it.”
“I do. Safe, companionable, detached. An ideal situation.”
“They’re thinking of getting married,” she protested.
“What could be more detached than that?”
She pushed her plate away. “Speak for your own parents.”

“Okay, change of subject: How did the brewer like the party?”
The Queen Mother had come to Washington, and the British
embassy had the day before given her a massive afternoon
reception, with room enough on the list for even Mary Johnson and
an escort. She had pressed Paul into service after Fuller mentioned
that he himself was taking Lucy Boardman, the hard little Saltonstall
relative who’d stayed on in the District after her summer course at
the National Gallery.
“He didn’t enjoy it as much as your companion seemed to,” said
Mary. “Anyway, it wasn’t a very hot ticket if the likes of me got to go.
The crowd looked like something out of Cecil B. DeMille.”
Both of them raised their heads at the sound of another voice.
“Probably even I could have gotten in.”
Two nights ago Mary had told Tim about her dinner plans with
Fuller, but she’d never expected to see him here.
Fuller was startled, too, though he didn’t let his expression
change. He pulled out a third chair from the table and, as Tim settled
himself, wondered about the gleam in his eye. Back in September,
Tim’s aggrieved note, left in the mail slot on I Street, could be
ascribed to drunkenness and the upset caused by McIntyre’s
revelations. Fuller had never mentioned it to him, just urged him to
find out the rest of McIntyre’s story.
But this?
“He missed my birthday,” said Tim, looking at Mary and pointing to
Hawk. “Eight days ago.” Then he turned to Hawk and pointed at
Mary: “She remembered.” Finally, he turned back to Mary and
pointed to Hawk: “Like I said, she forgot.”
“Maybe I’d better leave you two gentlemen alone,” said Mary.

“I’m pretty much always alone,” said Tim.
“Fuller, you should take him home.”
“Home?” asked Tim. “Where would that be? Not 2124 I Street.
That’s not home.”
“No,” said Fuller, calmly getting up. “But it’s where we’re heading.”
The two of them put Mary in a taxi and began walking west. Tim
was unsure exactly what fate awaited him; he wanted only to say
that he was sorry, that he shouldn’t have done what he just had. And
yet, after the hours he’d wound up roaming Capitol Hill this
afternoon, triply confused about the trinity of Hawkins, God, and
McCarthy, he couldn’t help himself. How easy, almost gay,
Charlottesville suddenly seemed. Right now he wanted not to be
slapped, but to be thrown under the wheels of the DeSoto that was
passing.
The silence, unbearable, continued as he and Hawkins turned the
corner onto I Street. “I’ll go home,” Tim finally said.
Still Hawkins said nothing.
“I’ll never do that again,” Tim promised.
“No, you won’t.”
Panic seized him; he waited for the next clause to strike like an ice
pick—because you’ll never be seeing me again.
Hawkins tugged him into an alley and pushed him against a wall.
“You’re right,” he said, his face inches from Tim’s. “You belong to me,
and as the advertisement says, I’m the man who has everything.
And I always will.”

He thought he could see Hawk having to struggle to get the words
out, having to make an effort to say something this cruel, and he
took a small, crazy comfort from that fact, like a man catching the
scent of flowers as he plunges off a ledge.
“Take it or leave it, Skippy. You’ve got five seconds.”
“I’ll take it.”

CHAPTER TWENTY-FIVE

November 29, 1954
“It’s a great privilege to be with you tonight!”
At the distant podium, Jean McCarthy looked buxom but clerical, a
pretty white collar showing above her plain black dress. “I only wish
my husband could be here, too. I want you to know how deeply
touched Joe is by the tremendous fight you are waging.”
“Dear Christ,” said Hawkins, handing his mother’s opera glasses
to Tim. “Looks like yours truly isn’t the only State employee not
supposed to be here tonight.” With Hawk’s finger guiding his gaze,
Tim managed to see, a dozen rows down and over to the right, the
figure of Miss Lightfoot, whose hat suggested a highly alert chicken.
She was in full cry with the crowd of 13,000, chanting “WHO
PROMOTED PERESS?” while applauding Jean McCarthy.
“I can’t figure out the hat,” said Tim, who had to resist admiring the
zeal that had compelled this woman to flout the rules against political
activity by federal workers and travel all the way from Washington for
this rally in Madison Square Garden. “I think it’s maybe supposed to
be an eagle,” he guessed, still staring at the headgear.
“No, it’s the cuckoo on a broken clock,” said Hawkins, who’d never
told Tim about the interrogation its wearer had instigated, nearly a
year ago, in Room M305.
Every courting couple that Tim knew had gone to at least one
basketball game or boxing match at the Garden. In fact, Tom
Hanrahan had popped the question to Frances right here during a
welterweight bout. Tim supposed that tonight would be the closest
he’d ever get to such an experience; he’d even joked to himself that

the Garden would always be “our place” for him and Hawk, given
their both having been here before, however unknown to each other,
at the Draft Ike rally back in ’52.
He had certainly not expected to be with him here tonight. Tommy
McIntyre had called the apartment in Stuyvesant Town on Saturday,
as the Thanksgiving weekend began drawing to a close. Tim and
Frances and their mother had just come back from a matinee of
Teahouse of the August Moon (he’d been more curious to see Tea
and Sympathy), and Tommy had asked him to stay in New York a
little longer to be his eyes and ears at the anti-censure rally planned
for Monday at the Garden. Tim had thought it a strange request—
what could he see from these mezzanine seats that the papers
wouldn’t report or the radio wouldn’t air?—but he’d said yes. And
before he could think too much about it, knowing that Hawk
extended every holiday weekend as far as possible, he’d picked up
the phone and called the Charles Fuller residence at Park and
Seventy-fourth.
Mrs. Fuller had answered, her voice almost a whisper, not at all
the throaty dowager he’d been expecting. He’d almost wanted to tell
her it was “Skippy,” the namesake of her Bishop Sheen’s angel, but
she’d quickly handed the phone to Hawk, who explained that he was
on his way out to “a little party for the Saltonstall niece thriceremoved, or whatever she is.” He’d laughed at Tim’s own invitation
as soon as he heard it: “Are you trying to get me fired?” he asked,
going on to explain the provisions of the Hatch Act.
Tim hadn’t really thought of that, but knew, once Hawk cited the
prohibition, that he would say yes.
“I’m in,” Hawk had answered. “What could be more fun than a
chance to see the Hottentots drunk on political firewater?”
GOD BLESS MCCARTHY said a badge worn by the man on Tim’s
right. NO TO CENSURE, YES TO A MEDAL said his sign. The Pledge of

Allegiance, which now contained the congressionally authorized
words “under God,” had already been recited twice tonight, and a
roaming spotlight, on cue, had just fallen on the figure of Roy Cohn,
whose illumination provoked a tremendous roar as the former
committee counsel mounted the platform to give the last speech of
the evening. He was played onto the stage by the Hortonville
(Wisconsin) High School Band, whose members, living close by
McCarthy’s hometown of Appleton, had been flown to New York
earlier in the day.
“If the Senate votes to censure,” cried Cohn, maintaining the
volume if not profanity of his private conversations, “it will be
committing the blackest act in our whole history!”
“To hell with the Hatch Act,” Hawk said into Tim’s ear, over the
crowd’s screams of approval. “I should be putting this whole evening
on an expense report. Look at all the useful data I can give to
Morton. Names booed: Acheson, The New York Times. Names
cheered: Knowland, MacArthur, McCarran.”
“Yeah,” Tim shouted back. “It would have taken a regular Walter
Lippmann to figure out who’d make each list.”
“Skippy the Bitch!” said Hawkins. They both laughed as the crowd
thundered but, mindful of the need for protective coloring, they also
took care to applaud.
How easy, Tim thought, the last three weeks had been. The rules
were now plain, inviolable, the way it had been when God, not
Hawkins, had been God; the way it must be behind the Iron Curtain.
He told himself there was comfort in the end of aspiration, in knowing
this was all one would ever be allowed. He would let this be the other
Church that he was seeking, the only rules and authority he needed.
Everyone hurrahing for McCarthy knew, in fact, that his end was
near. The debating Senate had already voted cloture and would vote
on censure itself anytime now. One could picture the moment when

Jean McCarthy, in a sort of dewy, defiant mourning, would remove
her pretty white collar and make her dress completely black.
The Reverend Cuthbert O’Hara, once imprisoned in Red China—
an older, more persecuted version of Father Beane—rose to give the
benediction. Tim crossed himself, not for additional camouflage
against the crowd, but with a moment’s sincere shame over his
doubts and apostasy. He could not deny what he still believed in his
heart of hearts: that the censure of McCarthy would, despite
everything, be a victory for the Communists.
As his head came up from prayer, he tapped Hawkins on the arm.
“I’ve got to find a pay phone and make my call. You won’t run off?”
He didn’t know why he’d been asked to report in immediately—to
call collect, no less—rather than just give Tommy a description of the
rally when he got back to the office tomorrow afternoon. But as soon
as the phone in Washington picked up and he heard the older man’s
voice, it was clear: Tommy wanted the peculiar thrill of hearing Tim
reconstruct the futile rally in situ, amidst its actual dying roar. It was
also clear that the herald’s confusion and conflictedness were
exciting him in some further, cruel way.
Tim realized that Tommy was off the wagon. Through the line he
could hear the clink of a bottle and a glass, and no voice save
Tommy’s own, which gleefully interrupted his paraphrase of Jean
McCarthy’s remarks. “And to think it’s all because of Charlie’s little
boy!” Tommy cackled.
For a moment he thought Tommy was referring to himself. But
then he understood. “You mean Senator Potter’s son?”
“Yup, Charlie’s little bastard. The kid’s got ten fewer IQ points than
his father, which is saying something, but he’s a handsome enough
lad to speak to people’s weaknesses. You know what Joe’s
weakness is, don’t you?”

“Boys?” asked Tim, as flatly as he could.
Tommy laughed loudly. “Boys, girls, your old-maid auntie. When
he’s hammered he’ll grope anything—slobber over it with tender,
lustful kisses.”
This is what had happened in New York. This is what Alsop had
told Hawk about.
As the fading cries of the crowd continued to reach Tim from the
Garden’s exit ramps—“THE MAN! THE ‘ISM’! McCARTHY!”—
Tommy explained that the plan had been for the house detective to
rescue the boy “at a point where Joe had been compromised, and
photographed, yet nothing too serious had happened to the little
angel.” But there’d been “a bit of a backfire. After I’d paid him my
own good money, the damned house dick decided to bring the
picture to his boss’s offspring, our good friend Dave Schine. Jesus
Jumpin’ Christ! I didn’t realize I’d set up the little assignation on one
of the Schine family properties!”
Tim could hear Tommy pouring himself another.
“Does the boy’s mother,” Tim asked, “know what happened?”
“She’s too poor and too drunk to care,” answered Tommy, who
went on with his story. “Yes, that was my blunder. The house dick
decided the picture would fetch a higher price from the soon-to-be
Private Schine than the one it commanded from me. Dave could
keep the photo to protect Joe or to do him in. Either way, however he
inclined, it was worth something to him.”
One last multitudinous demand to know who promoted Peress
reached Tim’s ears, while out of his left eye he noticed Hawk
chatting up one of the red-white-and-blue-armbanded ushers,
somebody handsome. He cupped the receiver’s mouthpiece and
nearly shouted to Tommy: “What am I supposed to say? That I’m
sorry you failed?”

“Failed?” shouted Tommy. “I succeeded! I may have brought Joe
down a little more slowly, a trifle less spectacularly, but coming down
he is, because of those hearings. Which all derived, Master Laughlin,
from what me and Charlie’s boy managed to accomplish, however
inadvertently, in that hotel room. Every bit of pressure to treat Schine
special in the army derived from that picture—not the goddamned
nothing of a picture they wrangled over in the Caucus Room! Dave
let Joe know he had it, and from that moment on, if Royboy insisted
Dave get an ice cream sundae every morning at reveille, Joe was
ready to initial the request.”
“MAKE MINE McCARTHY!” The audience had dispersed to the
point where the chant, like an echo of something long past, barely
made it up the ramp to the pay phone, which Tim, pretending the
connection had been broken, now hung up.
He left with Hawk, walking east on Fiftieth. “I feel sick” was all he
said as they reached Broadway.
“You can’t be. You had exactly half a hot dog.”
Tim shook his head.
“Are you off your milk? Haven’t had any since noon?”
If he were drunk, the way he’d been that night at O’Donnell’s, he
really would be throwing up. As it was, he managed to keep in step,
turning south with Hawk below the Winter Garden Theater, over
which Mary Martin’s hamstrung effigy flew as Peter Pan.
What Tommy had told him: Was it the fantasy of a revenge-crazed
drunk or potentially the scoop of Kenneth Woodforde’s—maybe even
Joe Alsop’s—life? If it was true, why did the thought of telling the
details to Hawk now make him feel sicker than six old-fashioneds
would? Because harboring someone else’s filthy secret made his
own secret, his love, feel filthy as well, as if it, too, were nothing
more than appetite, compulsively gratified. Telling the story would

make things even worse. Hawk would claim to be as amused by
McCarthy’s helplessness as he’d been by the crowd’s fervor—or as
he was this minute by the city’s night crawlers, passing by with their
own secrets.
The two of them entered Times Square, where all the neon in the
world could not lift the fact of night. “Surely you’re not going to walk
me home?” Tim asked, as playfully as he could. “All the way down
Broadway and over to Stuy Town?”
“Nope,” said Hawkins, squeezing the back of his neck as they
passed the statue of Father Duffy.
“And surely the night is too young for Hawkins Fuller to be going
home by himself?” He smiled up at Hawk, showed him, as he’d been
doing for weeks, what a sport he could be.
“Yep,” said Hawkins. “Way too early.”
They were soon at Forty-third Street. Hawk faced west, ready to
cross, and Tim realized: the clarinet player.
Should he keep chattering and walk him there, be the ultimate
good sport, as they’d imagined he’d have been if they’d encountered
each other three years ago, at the Draft Ike rally?
No, he wouldn’t, because he had just seen it, only feet away,
sitting in this lurid forest of light like a cottage, its own weak, nonneon glow making it pure, a clean well-lighted place, the one he now
knew he had to reach, the place where they would take him in. This
was the secular Church he had been seeking.
“Okay, Hawk, I’ll see you in the funny papers.”
Already crossing the street, Fuller turned back for a second and
snapped off a mischievous salute.

Tim returned it and then walked in the opposite direction, toward
the little structure nestled so oddly in Times Square, like a single
cotton stitch upon a sea of sequins.
He opened its door and entered the first of the three offices it
contained. He filled out several forms, told a lie on one of them, and
then, at 10:45 p.m., raised his right hand and enlisted in the Army of
the United States.

PART THREE

DECEMBER 1954–NOVEMBER 1956
America I’m putting my queer shoulder to
the wheel.
—ALLEN GINSBERG

CHAPTER TWENTY-SIX

December 25, 1954
The homily was coming from Washington’s National Cathedral, but
as Mary gave half her attention to its telecast by NBC’s New Orleans
affiliate, she could hear actual church bells, their sound arriving on a
light wind from Jackson Square, half a mile away.
Her father called out from his study: “Mary, my darlin’, your
gentleman is on the telephone.”
“I’ll be right there.”
She walked, hesitantly, toward the other room, feeling guilty over
her father’s use of “gentleman” rather than “fiancé.” She had never
told Daddy about the engagement to Paul; not when it was made,
not when it was broken.
Mr. Johnson rose from his wooden swivel chair and tilted the
shade of his brass desk lamp, as if to allow his daughter a softer light
in which to conduct what the look on her face indicated would be a
difficult conversation.
“Paul,” she said, taking the receiver.
“Merry Christmas, Mary.”
“I had the television on. I could hear Wilson’s grandson—Dean
Sayre—giving the sermon in D.C.”
“Right,” said Paul, uncomprehendingly. He had no more taste for
historical trivia than for the immediate political kind.

“Are you with your family?” Mary asked.
“Yes, we’re just back from church. Mount Olivet Lutheran, not the
cathedral.”
“Daddy and I didn’t even make the effort. We’ve gotten to be very
freethinking in the last couple of years.” She tried laughing. “Actually,
his knee is bothering him. He just didn’t want to go out.”
“Knee-thinking.”
“I suppose.” Bless his heart. She felt a surge of affection toward
Paul’s effortful wit.
“Look, Mary,” he said, after a pause. “There’s a girl called Marjorie
Wheeler. She keeps books for my brother, and I’m wondering if it’s
okay for me to take her to a party next week, for New Year’s Eve.”
“Of course.”
“Okay. It just felt funny. I wanted to check.”
He was enough like other men to want her jealous over this—and
she was jealous, a little bit—but he was also nice enough for the
request to be genuine. She could picture him, a thousand miles
away, looking at his shoes.
“Honest, Paul.”
As she said it, she felt another small wave of affection. Maybe, if
he hadn’t always been so solicitous of her feelings, he might have
drowned her reluctance, overwhelmed it, and floated the romance to
an altar. But she’d been the same way with him; even now the two of
them were left stumbling through a handful of courtesies before they
could decently hang up the phone.

She had broken the engagement three weeks ago on the illogical
grounds that Paul was the marrying kind. Her attraction to that solid
type depended to some extent on a belief in herself as its opposite—
a girl still cut out for unusual adventures and unusual personalities,
like Fuller, or even Tim Laughlin. Yes, it was time to put an end to her
girlhood, but she couldn’t yet put an end to this sense of herself, or
to the feeling that the man who could truly speak to it might still walk
through the door of Congressional Relations or send a drink to her
table at Harvey’s. To marry Paul—with whom on some days, usually
bad days at the office, she felt she was in love—would be to get
married for the same reason Beverly and Jerry Baumeister now
seemed likely to: to find shelter from one’s particular storm.
She went back to the living room and saw her frail-looking father
reading the Times-Picayune. They usually cooked on Christmas, but
today they would settle for a restaurant in the Quarter, sitting down to
dinner at about the time Beverly and Jerry would be exclaiming over
their hearts of lettuce with Russian dressing, the first course of the
special at the Hotel Harrington, to which Beverly had said they would
go with her boys after seeing the tree on the White House lawn.
The NBC commentator, in an ecumenical spirit, was now reading
Pius XII’s Christmas message, apparently composed before the
pope’s collapse on December 2, the day of McCarthy’s censure—a
fact, Mary suspected, that Miss Lightfoot, had she been Catholic,
would no doubt have found significant. “If only,” spoke the stricken
pontiff, “men knew how to live out their whole lives in that
atmosphere of joy, with those feelings of goodness and peace, which
Christmas pours forth on all sides, how different, how much happier
the earth would be!”
Mary also wondered what Miss Lightfoot would think of a
homosexual joining this man’s army. Returning to Washington after
the rally in New York, Tim at first had said nothing about his
enlistment or anything else. He’d made himself scarce until she’d
called his office, at which point he spoke only of how Lyndon

Johnson, in preparation for the Democrats’ takeover of the Senate,
was managing to overwork even the Republicans.
Things had certainly not been busy in CR—it was easier selling
Ike’s foreign policy to the midterm-triumphant Democrats than it had
been to some of the former Republican majority—and so Mary had
at last insisted on Tim’s joining her for a long weekday lunch at
Reeves’ cafeteria, where over ice cream sodas he admitted that he
was due to report for basic training at Fort Dix on January 11.
She’d insisted on knowing why, and he’d responded with
unconvincing declarations about anticommunism and doing his bit
and putting his money where his mouth was, refusing all the while to
admit that volunteering was his extreme means of breaking with
Fuller. Mostly he’d concentrated on his ice cream soda, which he
may have hoped would get his weight above the minimum required
by the induction physical.
Even now she didn’t know why he’d joined, though she imagined
that he would have the self-discipline to get through it. He had been
able at Reeves’, after all, to resist asking her about Fuller, the
cherished topic of their every previous conversation. She gathered
that he’d not even seen him since the night he’d signed up in Times
Square.
He didn’t tell her the enlistment was a secret, but she’d kept it one
until leaving Washington three nights ago, when she air-mailed a
Christmas card to Fuller at his parents’ apartment in New York: Can’t
you do something about this? Or undo it?
In fact, she’d been hoping, when the phone rang just before, that it
might be Fuller instead of Paul.

Frances’s baby reached for the celery stalks in the cut-glass
centerpiece and shrieked when she was thwarted. Uncle Alan, his
nerves even now a little raw from the war, winced at the sound.
Apologizing with a glance, Frances tried to soothe her daughter with
a tiny spoonful of mashed turnips.
Except for little Maria Loretta, the Christmas dinner table had
fallen silent, Grandma Gaffney having made it clear she blamed her
own daughter and son-in-law for her grandson Timothy’s absence.
Frances’s attempt to explain it had only made things worse.
“What did you say was the name of that place?” asked Grandma
Gaffney.
“Fides.”
“Sounds like a dog.”
“It’s a Catholic settlement house in Washington,” Frances noted
once again. “On Eighth Street,” she added, not that the address
meant anything to anyone around the table. “Tim told me in his card
that he’d spend Christmas Eve giving out food baskets to the poor,
and that afterward he’d go to midnight Mass.”
Grandma Gaffney, who had not been to church in forty years and
who found pious Catholics more irritating than the Jews, once more
frowned.
“I’ll bet Tim’s just trying to save his money,” offered Paul Laughlin,
knowing his mother-in-law would find this explanation more tolerable
than any involving charity.
“You could have sent him a bus ticket,” said Grandma Gaffney.
“He didn’t seem all that happy to be here at Thanksgiving,” Tim’s
mother pointed out. She’d been crumpling a paper napkin in her right
hand. Uncle Alan wasn’t the only one with nerves.

“I’ll bet he’s just too damned busy down there,” suggested Uncle
Frank. “That’s a big job he’s got, for a kid. Though I wish he was
working for McCarthy and not this Potter guy. You watch,” he added,
wiping up some cranberry sauce with a slice of bread, “Joe’ll bounce
back.”
Tom Hanrahan, while hardly a foe of McCarthy’s, scoffed at the
possibility. “I read that Joe commissioned a poll about running for
president in ’56. I think he got three percent.”
“Tim is fine,” said Paul Laughlin, changing back the subject. “Our
card said he’ll soon be taking a couple of trips to Michigan with the
boss, but that even so he’ll get up to New York before Easter. He
promises.”
No, thought Frances, he hadn’t been happy here at Thanksgiving.
She could remember when they’d gotten home from Teahouse of the
August Moon and she’d found him in their parents’ bedroom, his
sleeves rolled up, talking on the phone with that Irishman he’d
mentioned from his office. When the call ended, she’d asked about
the cuff links he’d set down on a doily. “HF?”
“Hawkins Fuller,” she remembered him saying without pleasure or
defiance—without anything, really, except maybe a kind of
exhaustion. “It’s a man’s name. He gave them to me.”
She’d looked at her brother and left the room, saying a prayer for
him, as she was doing now, while she let the baby lick a drop of
gravy from her fingertip.

“My lung man is in the capital,” said Fuller’s uncle Ned, with some
difficulty. “When I come down to see him, you and I should have
lunch at the Harvard Club. We need to have a discussion.”

Uncle Ned’s poor health was the chief reason most of the Fuller
family had gathered here in New York instead of Maine for Christmas
dinner. Looking at Ned’s skeletal frame, Hawkins couldn’t
understand how his uncle might weather a trip to the District, let
alone why he continued to keep one of his specialists down there.
Fuller’s father was even more quiet than his brother-in-law today,
and as the first round of cocktails jingled into the room on an old cart,
Mrs. Fuller appeared so relieved by the distraction that she didn’t
bother to check her wristwatch, as she usually did, to make sure it
was at least past one.
Her sister, Hawkins’ unmarried aunt Valerie, finally put a topic
upon the air, expressing agreement with the French parliament’s
decision to reject a NATO treaty that would allow the Germans to
rearm. Valerie’s one great affair of the heart having occurred in Paris
thirty years ago, her approval of all things French was expected to
last a lifetime.
Mrs. Fuller, an internationalist who still regarded Wendell Willkie
as having been a most attractive candidate and man, wanly
disagreed: “Adenauer says he’s prepared to be patient.”
“So, in a way, was Hitler,” said Aunt Valerie. “The last time.”
From across the room, Hawkins looked at the small tableau
presented by his mother and aunt. Neither was exactly driving the
holiday spirit at full throttle. By way of contrast, a picture from
yesterday’s papers sprang to his mind: Mrs. Perle Mesta,
surrounded by gamboling orphans at the Christmas party she’d
given in her Washington apartment. The only children here above
Park and Seventy-fourth were in a room down the hall with their
mother, the sister Hawkins disliked only a little less than the one at
Uncle Ned’s New Mexico place, over which they’d all be fighting, it
now seemed, soon enough.

Hawkins’ brother-in-law, Robert, an orthopedic surgeon whose
unhappiness lay in knowing that he would never be department chief
as his father had been, began a long, almost footnotable
denunciation of the hospital that was allowing this situation. Robert’s
disappointment hung ever more thickly on the living-room air until the
girl at last called them to the table, where the food might be easier to
push around than the conversation.
Mr. Fuller sliced the ham.
“Excellent work,” said Hawkins. “Robert’s father couldn’t have
done better.” When no one laughed, he added that it was “without
question a neater job than Dr. Sheppard would have managed.”
“Hawkins, honestly,” said his mother.
“You’re right,” he replied, retracting his reference to the Ohio
surgeon who’d finally been convicted of slaughtering his wife. “He
was only an osteopath, hardly fit for comparison.”
He knew, even as she begged him to change the subject, that his
mother was thanking God for the life and mischief in him, for the
vitality that she, somewhere inside, still had a measure of herself—
even if, except in the televised presence of Bishop Sheen, she
retained no ability to display it. Mrs. Fuller was now dutifully back on
the subject of German rearmament, pointing out to her sister that
even Churchill was for it.
“It will provoke the Russians,” declared Valerie.
“And this time they’ll overrun both the Germans and the French,”
said Mr. Fuller, verbal at last. “And probably our own boys over there
to boot.”
Hawkins found himself imagining the front lines of such a war,
maybe a year or so from now. They’ll have to put rocks in his
pockets, he thought, just to keep him from bouncing out of the jeep.

When international affairs were exhausted, Robert got everyone to
the mince pie with a renewed recitation of the hospital’s
underappreciation of orthopedists. Hawkins tried to remember: Didn’t
Mary’s father need to get his knee fixed? Hadn’t that also been in her
Christmas card? He excused himself and went to his old room,
across from the one inside which his sister’s children were still
stuffed. On the desk, beneath the St. Paul’s pennant and the picture
of Bill Tilden—who couldn’t have guessed that one?—Mary’s
envelope still sat. It was next to a pair of whimsical mittens that the
relentless Saltonstall girl had knitted. He supposed she wanted him
to think of her as a spirited girl, Marie Antoinette playing the
milkmaid.
He took a piece of stationery from the desk’s middle drawer and
wrote: “Dear Skippy, I didn’t raise my boy to be a soldier….”

CHAPTER TWENTY-SEVEN

January 10, 1955
“It’s hard to know what to save,” said Tim, looking at a Herblock
cartoon of McCarthy as a baboon. He’d clipped it from the Post eight
months ago.
“Save yourself,” said Tommy McIntyre, who’d just approached the
desk that Tim was cleaning out. “Let Uncle Sam feed you three
squares a day. Put on a little flesh. Get away from all this.”
“Oh, he’ll be back,” said Miss Cook, bustling in with Tim’s
separation form. “Look at Senator Barkley!” Harry Truman’s vice
president had in November been elected to his old Senate seat and
the other day restored to his committee chairmanships.
“Perhaps even ‘the Jones boy’ will one day reappear among us,”
offered Tommy.
“Where is Bob Jones?” asked Miss Cook. Seven months after the
Maine primary, no one seemed to know his location or what he might
be doing. With no response to her question, Miss Cook proceeded to
muse on the difficulty of keeping up with all the changes on the Hill—
in particular, of trying to imagine the Democrats’ Senator McClellan
heading what everyone would almost certainly keep calling the
McCarthy committee.
“As hard to believe as another Roosevelt in the Congress,” said
Tommy, reminding them that both branches of the family, Teddy’s
and FDR’s, had for most of this century confined themselves to the
other end of Pennsylvania Avenue. But last night, Jimmy Roosevelt,
the second son of the late president to be elected to the House, had
stolen the show at the Congressional Club reception.

“You take care of yourself,” said Miss Cook. “And send us a
postcard.” She gave Tim a kiss, and left him alone with Mr. McIntyre.
“You going to wait around for Charlie? To say goodbye?” asked
Tommy.
“I don’t think so,” said Tim, recalling the lie in his Christmas card
home. I’ll be visiting Michigan with the boss. He hadn’t needed such
embellishment, but he’d been determined, and still was, not to tell his
mother and father and Frances about enlisting—not until he was
irretrievably at Fort Dix. And he’d be there in less than twenty-four
hours, if he could keep himself, for one last day, from tearing across
town to the State Department or, even worse, the apartment on I
Street.
“But I did like Senator Potter,” he finally said. “He was nice to me.”
He paused, regretfully, and added: “I could have worked harder.”
“You worked hard enough,” Tommy assured him. “And when
Charlie caught you looking out the window, he just figured you were
in love.”
“I was in love.”
“You are in love. But don’t worry, Timothy. Charlie thinks it’s a girl, I
guarantee you. You know the extent of his imagination.”
Tim went back to filling the box. He had never admitted anything to
Tommy, but never lied to him either, certainly never pretended there
was a girl.
“You won’t forget Mr. Fuller,” said Tommy, in the low tones of a
fortune-teller. “Not just because you’ve started toting a rifle. Any
more than I forget her by hoisting a glass.”
“Are you hoisting one these days?”

They were both surprised by his nerve in asking. Unlike Tommy’s
questions—asked only to make plain that the asker already had the
compromising answer—Tim’s was an actual inquiry, a way of
learning whether there was anything he should be doing to help this
cruel, loving man.
“Yes, I am, Timothy. I am indeed.”
“I could tell from the phone call I made from the rally. When you
told me all that awful stuff.”
“Awful?” countered Tommy, already again combative. “You might
consider all the good that ‘awful stuff’ did.”
“What good has it done you?”
McCarthy had fallen but Potter was still on his prosthetic feet, and
Tommy, his hunger as yet unappeased, looked to be on his way back
to the Cheboygan gutter from which he’d been plucked. However
sincerely Tim had asked his last question, he could feel the thrill of
its aggression, a sensation similar to what he’d experienced one
night a few months ago when to his astonishment Hawkins, with
some wordless guidance from his hand, had insisted that Tim
penetrate him. The act had ended up as another form of submission,
during which he seemed to be gathered in, enfolded and protected in
a different way from the usual, but for an instant, at its beginning, he
had enjoyed a sense of himself as being brutally in charge.
Now, as then, he subsided quickly into a renewed willingness to
serve. “There’s a Father Hackett,” he told Tommy, “over at St. Peter’s
on Second and C. He meets on Monday nights with people who—”
“People who are drunks?” asked Tommy.
“Yes.”

“Why should you want me sober? After all these terrible things I’ve
done and insisted on pouring into your ears, I should think, Timothy,
you’d be glad to see me trampled by the pink elephants.”
Tim wrote out the church’s address and Father Hackett’s name on
one of Potter’s business cards. He handed it to Tommy, whose
bloodshot eyes he was now close enough to see. He could also
smell a peppermint fighting the whiskey on Tommy’s tongue.
“You said it yourself,” declared Tim. “We’re alike. But I don’t have
what you’ve got to fall back on.”
“A taste for drink to prop you up?”
“No,” said Tim. “I’m you without any anger. And I have a feeling I
scare you.”

I didn’t raise my boy to be a soldier.
Here in the apartment it was even harder to decide what he should
pack or throw away. He could put Hawkins’ letter into the silky cloth
flap inside the suitcase lid—but what was he to do with the empty
milk bottle? Bring it to Fort Dix? Should he have shipped it to
Frances and Tom’s on Staten Island with the other stuff he’d sent
this afternoon, which wouldn’t arrive in New York until he himself had
reached Jersey?
One suitcase was all he’d carry; he supposed its contents would
fill about half the footlocker they’d give him in the barracks. Stuffing
his missal in between some underwear and socks, he again resolved
to make his confession before Easter. It would be too risky to let an
army chaplain hear it; he would take a bus into town, or even wait till
he had a pass for New York City.

Folded inside the missal was a prayer he had clipped from the
Star, a newly approved English version of the words for extreme
unction, murmurs to bring the dying back from the brink or escort
them safely over it. O Redeemer, we implore Thee, by the grace of
the Holy Spirit cure the illness of this sick man and heal his wounds;
forgive his sins; and drive away from him all pains of mind and body.
In Thy Mercy, give him his health, inward and outward…. He had
memorized the sentences, and he whispered them now.
Without a knock, the door opened. Hawkins, in his Harris overcoat,
came toward him, stopping inches away, looking first into his eyes
and then around the room. Picking the milk bottle up from the desk,
he reached into his pants for two cents, the refund for an empty. He
gave Tim the pennies and put the bottle into one of his overcoat’s
huge pockets.
“Do you want the cuff links back?” Tim asked.
Hawkins took hold of him, tightly, and pressed him against the
overcoat, damp with drizzle. “You don’t need to do this,” he said.
“Yes, I do,” said Tim. “Besides,” he added, trying to sound
cheerful, “the draft will get me eventually.”
“I’m not going to wait for you, you know.”
It was hardly a possibility that required denial. The two of them
burst out laughing.
“Come on,” said Hawkins, tilting his head toward the front door.
“Finish up.”
They were going out? Tim didn’t think he could bear it, though it
would be worse if Hawk started pushing him toward the bed, now
stripped of its sheets.
“I have a five-thirty bus to catch,” said Tim. “A.M.”

Hawk threw the last handful of things into the suitcase before
picking it up and moving him out the door.
The night was warm and the drizzle had just stopped, and the
Capitol, shiny as mercury, seemed like a spaceship ready to
disgorge Michael Rennie in The Day the Earth Stood Still, which Tim
now remembered seeing one Saturday night up at Fordham with
Bobby Garahan. Hawk said they would pass up the streetcar and
walk down Pennsylvania Avenue, whose shabbiness, he declared,
was not a disgrace but rather a gesture of humility by the strongest
republic on earth. “You think so?” Tim asked, trying to keep the air
crowded with chatter, dreading the wordless moments when the
swish of the rattan suitcase against Hawkins’ coat was the only
sound.
“Two more blocks,” Hawk said, pointing to the Old Post Office,
their destination, a gigantic Romanesque pile between Eleventh and
Twelfth streets. Once there, Hawkins took them around the back to
an unlocked door. “Tip from an FBI friend,” he explained.
Hoover’s Bureau now had a portion of its training academy in the
building, which the Postmaster General had long ago ceded to a
motley assortment of small federal agencies and government record
collections. Fuller led Tim through the dim after-hours light to a bank
of elevators. “Not that one,” he said, instructing Tim to wait for
another car. “Number one is solely for the use of Edgar and Clyde.
Or so I hear.”
They rode to the ninth floor, as high as any of the elevators went.
Stashing the suitcase by a radiator, Hawkins then piloted them
through a door and into the clock tower, which rose several stories
and could be scaled only by ladders attached to its stone walls. Up
they climbed, past the kind of narrow windows designed for medieval
archers holding off a siege. Going first, looking like a tweedcostumed Errol Flynn, Hawkins made fast acrobatic progress toward
the tower’s bell-less belfry. His sudden arrival at the top, where no

windows or screens enclosed the arches, startled a dozen pigeons
from their nighttime roost; they clattered into flight, taking off in the
direction of the White House.
He pulled Tim up the last steps and onto the belfry’s floor, so that
the two of them stood above the tower’s northern clockface, looking
down on Pennsylvania Avenue and the Star’s building across the
street. The sight of it, and its streetcar stop, was so painful that Tim
moved to another arch, one that faced more to the east. Through it
he could see the Navy Yard and the smokestacks of St. Elizabeth’s,
the insane asylum still holding Ezra Pound.
“You think I’ll wind up there?” he asked.
“Doubtful,” Hawkins replied. “I have the higher actuarial risk. You
know, the mad Mayflower type.”
Softly, Tim said, “I have to get over you.”
“Yes, you do.”
“Then let’s take desperate measures!” Tim brightly cried, turning
around to face Fuller with a smile. “Hawk,” he said, pointing to the
overcoat’s pocket, “hand me that.”
Fuller gave him the empty milk bottle, which Tim took back to the
Pennsylvania Avenue arch.
“Hold me over the ledge.” The tower’s stone shelf extended far
enough out to block any view of the sidewalk below. “Just hold my
ankles so I can lie on my stomach and see over.”
Hawkins gave him a skeptical look but took hold of him above his
loafers. “This may be the only part of you I’ve never touched.”
“Don’t make me laugh,” said Tim, inching forward on his stomach
until he could finally see the sidewalk. No one was coming. The milk

bottle, still in his right hand, caught the moonlight. Empty of gold or
frankincense, it was still the most precious casket he could offer up
to God, the treasured thing that he could renounce along with its
original giver. He loosened his hand and let it fall three hundred feet
to the ground. The sound that came back up wasn’t glassy at all, just
a small pop, the kind made by a gun that had been fitted with a
silencer.
Hawkins reeled him in and set him down. “You can keep the two
cents,” he said.
In one corner of the belfry there was a small pile of blankets, none
too clean, left over from others’ trysts. Fuller moved the stack to a
different corner of the tower and sat down on it. Their faces, he
explained, would be awakened by the light of the sun when it rose in
the east. “Don’t worry,” he said, coaxing Tim toward him. “I’ll get you
to your bus.”
As the wind rushed through the arches, Hawk held him, tenderly
stroking the side of his face, trying to transfer from his own body
what Tim realized, with fresh despair, was relief at his departure.
He clenched his teeth, summoning the resolve to say it: “Promise
you won’t write.”
“I promise,” Hawkins said.

CHAPTER TWENTY-EIGHT

March 11, 1955
69th Infantry Division
Fort Dix, N.J.
March 11, 1955
Dear Francy,
Well, I’m 5½ weeks into it, and maybe this time I’ll get the
whole way through. “Last time, you will recall”—as one of our
old serials used to say—I made it to nineteen days before that
chest cold put me in the camp hospital. That got me “recycled”:
everybody who drops out has to start over from the beginning,
because it’s too hard to find slots in medias res. (How much
Latin do you remember?)
So, guess what? This round, for everything except knowledge
of the Uniform Code of Military Justice, my first set of marks are
even lower than the last. This is attributable, I guess, to natural
incompetence and a tougher company commander, a second
lieutenant who’s very demanding but nice enough underneath.
So far he’s called me “shitbird” only twice, and he’s allowed us
to perform the rifle-reassembly test in simple lights-out darkness
instead of with blindfolds. (Some commanders do that—I’m not
kidding.)
So: two and a half weeks to go.
Coming in, back in January, I was told to gain ten pounds; I’ve
managed to lose three. It’s so cold here that the barracks
furnace (coal! just like 9th Avenue) never stops puffing. But for
real bone-rattling chill, nothing can beat last week’s bivouac. We
were doing “camouflage and concealment” maneuvers, and I
couldn’t puncture the can of evaporated milk with the opener:
the stuff had frozen solid!

I’ve got the top bunk again. The other seven guys in the
squad are mostly like the ones I used to give a wide berth to
back at St. Agnes’, but I’ve made friends with a nice doctor (they
draft them in droves) who’s got a wife (pregnant) back home.
Strange to think of Dad being here in the CCC twenty years
ago. (He once told me it was the only place he ever saw reefer!)
I’m sorry I haven’t written. You scold me about it worse than
Mom, who’s sort of given up on the subject. You ask if I’m
running away from something, or someone. Mostly the drill
instructor! He’ll actually pound you on the back if you’re not
marching fast enough with your rifle. (The M-1 is a lot easier to
reassemble than it is to carry.)
I might have to welsh on my Easter promise. On Sunday, April
10th, I could be on my way to wherever it is I’ll be doing
Advanced Individual Training (not as customized as it sounds). I
don’t have my assignment yet, and God only knows what they’ll
decide I’m suited for, but that’s the story.
Say hi to Tom and kiss Maria Loretta for me.
Love,
Beetle Bailey
P.S. Please don’t worry. All shall be well.
Timmer xxx
Folding the letter, he wondered what it would be like to run away
from something with somebody, the two of you fleeing the same
thing together. In the papers, Princess Margaret’s RAF boyfriend
was now saying that they would be willing to accept exile if they were
allowed to marry. It sounded like the grandest of fates: to be safely
joined in some realm beyond the one that had refused to provide the
two of you a place. Of course, all of this first assumed that both of
you actually wanted each other.
He had trouble being ashamed of writing so few letters, not when
he always had more to leave out than put in. Was he really

supposed to tell Francy about the guy in the squad who was, he felt
sure, like himself—this draftee clerk from a New York City
government office who had pronounced the old olive-drab uniforms
more “attractive” than the new Army Green ones and observed that
camouflage-and-concealment sounded “a little like Max Factor’s
latest”?
Maybe that guy would be the one to bug out? To go sobbing to the
headshrinker in the camp hospital? Actually not, thought Tim. More
likely it would be the loudmouth from Bridgeport who loved to hold
his M-1 in one hand and his crotch in the other, and say—

This is my rifle
This is my gun
This is for killing
This is for fun—
as if it weren’t the two-hundredth time they’d all heard it.
The falling marks he’d just mentioned to Francy still had him
slightly above average in “coordination” and “resourcefulness” (no
one understood how they measured it), but below par in
“aggressiveness.” All this had probably been predictable from the
Armed Forces Qualifying Test he’d taken at the examining station in
D.C. before leaving for Fort Dix. He’d run into Kenneth Woodforde at
a cafeteria right after sitting the exam, and the journalist had mocked
his enlistment, revealing himself to be 4-F and expressing regret only
about having gotten his classification on physical rather than moral
grounds. “They discovered my bad shoulder before my voter
registration,” he said, the first concrete indication Tim had ever had
that Woodforde might really be a Communist.

Department of State
Washington, D.C.
March 11, 1955
Dear Dog-Face,
I don’t know how you can sign yourself that way, and it’s the
last time I’ll ever use it as a salutation, but there you go.
Thanks for the snapshot. White sidewalls, no? Isn’t that what
they call the haircut? They make you look even younger.
Are you sure they can’t detail you back to civilian life for a
week or two? I could use some extra help here: Senator
Knowland wants to start World War Three by having the 7th
Fleet intercept a Finnish tanker that’s heading to Red China to
deliver jet fuel, and Beverly is spending more time over at the
Congressional Secretaries Club than she is here. Someone in
Senator Stennis’ office bent the membership rules so she could
take a small wisecracking part (“very Eve Arden,” she says) in
“Revisin’ and Extendin’,” the revue they’ll be doing to benefit
some clinic in Georgetown for retarded children. I think Mrs.
Nixon was pictured with a couple of them in yesterday’s Star.
(The children, not the secretaries.) So if you see a mushroom
cloud, it’s the result of Beverly not being at her typewriter to
send Senator Knowland and his colleagues those gentle policy
pleadings from Mr. Morton.
Even so, it’s hard to blame her. These days she appears to be
the happiest person on the floor; maybe in the whole building.
When I told Paul—yes, we’re still friendly, and yes, he’s still
dating the bookkeeper—that you hadn’t been notified about your
advanced individual training (have I got the name right?), he
said to be sure and tell you not to let them turn you into a beanburner, which I gather is a cook, and which I gather his
bookkeeper is a much better one of than I. (I know you’ll be able
to straighten out the grammar of that sentence.)

Let me know what they do make you into. And where they’re
sending you next.
Love,
Mary
“Plucky wog!” exclaimed the Englishman at Couve de Murville’s
table.
With his own two hands, Prime Minister Nehru had the other day
saved himself from a knife attack, knocking a would-be assassin off
the running board of his limousine.
De Murville, the French foreign minister, nodded impassively to his
lunch companion here at the Harvard Club, but the Englishman’s
loud compliment caught the attention of Ned Fuller and his nephew,
Hawkins.
Still, Ned had no time for thinking about subcontinentals; the
Germans were again crowding his mind, thanks to Hawkins’ aunt
Valerie, who the other night at dinner in New York had loudly voiced
her distress over France’s belated capitulation to German
rearmament. “Fortunately, the Frogs are still carping about the Saar,”
Ned now told his nephew. “That gives her a little encouragement.”
Hawkins sipped a spoonful of consommé.
“I’m afraid,” said Uncle Ned, “that you and I have some important
things to talk about. More important than whether you or your sisters
are going to get my place in New Mexico.” He coughed into his water
glass; the lung man down here was not doing much good.
“You mean the world situation?” asked Hawkins. “The French and
the Germans?”
“No, your father’s financial situation.”

Hawkins pushed away the soup bowl. “Tell me it’s unexpectedly
good. I’m all ears.”
“It’s terrible. Bad investments. And bad choice of a girlfriend. The
latest one.”
“Myrna.”
“Maura,” Ned corrected. “It’s bad enough he pays her bills. But he
seems to be paying her debts, too—all the freight her last boyfriend
wouldn’t pick up. And your mother is only making things worse.”
“Mother doesn’t make scenes.”
Ned lit a cigarette. “No, she doesn’t. And she doesn’t make
investments, good or bad. What she’s been making are a lot of
charitable donations—to Catholic charities, no less. She’s spent
down a lot of her own capital, and your father’s besides.”
“Each according to her means,” said Hawkins.
“Meaning?”
“She can’t quite bring herself to kneel at Sheen’s altar rail. So she
sacrifices at the teller’s window.”
Ned shrugged and blew a smoke ring.
“What are the implications?” asked Hawkins.
“For you?”
“Of course.” Hawkins pierced the cracked crab with his fork and
smiled.
“Rather dire,” said Uncle Ned. “How do you feel about living off
your salary? It may come to that. I hate to tell you, but you’re not
even getting that house in New Mexico.”

Hawkins looked at the choice forkful of crab. “Should I send this
back and get a hamburger?”
“Don’t worry about me,” said Ned, who was paying for lunch.
“Cancer’s already tightened my belt. And I never had that much in
the first place. Maybe a fifth as much as your profligate parents.”
Living off his salary: Hawkins judged the idea to be no more
endurable than it would be to any of his Harvard trust-fund buddies
who’d gone into publishing. One might as well tell Lucy Boardman’s
father to live off what Wellesley paid him to teach art history.
“Pull your chair back,” said Uncle Ned.
Hawkins obliged.
“Just trying to get a look at you. See how expensive your tastes
are.” Ned paused, consideringly. “I can’t see the shoes. I hope they
aren’t in a league with the suit.”
Hawkins finished his crab and asked for a cigarette while they
waited for coffee. His shoes and suits were good enough to last a
long while, he thought. But at some point he’d need money for
trouble. One day his luck would run out; he would slip up in a way
that required more than the fifty dollars for a men’s-room arrest at
the Y. Money, put to bail or blackmail, would be what saved him.
“The nerve of Dad to be spending everything on his own
indiscretions!”
Hawkins laughed as he said it, but Ned, unsmiling, coughed hard,
rose from his chair, and waved off his nephew’s assistance. “Let me
head to the gents. I’ll be fine.”
As he waited for his uncle to return, Hawkins drank his coffee and
regarded both de Murville and the Gilbert-and-Sullivan character at

the other table. They were beginning to blur into a portrait on the wall
when the waiter approached with a message.
“A phone call, Mr. Fuller. From a Mr. Sorrell at the Pentagon.”
“Thanks.” Hawkins headed for one of the telephone cabins,
thinking how much easier it would be to focus for a moment or two
on Skippy’s future instead of his own.
He understood from a letter he’d seen on Mary’s desk that there
still might be time to affect a decision about Private Laughlin’s AIT,
even if his Fort Dix days with the Fighting Sixty-ninth—there was
nomenclatural combination!—would be over in a couple of weeks.
He knew someone, of course. He’d left the message with Sorrell
just an hour ago.
“Andy,” he said, taking the receiver. “You always were quick.”
“Got your own little Private Schine, do you?”
“What about the Monterey Language School?”
“That’s hard to do. Actually, it’s hard to do anything like this, but I’ll
accomplish what I can. Tell me his aptitudes.” He chuckled at the
word.
“Writes nicely. Clever. Terribly sincere right-winger. No particular
drive. A tender disposition. Would be a wonderful boy Friday to some
major general.”
Sorrell’s leering chuckle became a full laugh. “I see.”
Fuller said nothing, just waited for an answer.
“Well,” Sorrell at last replied, “maybe USAIS, the information
school in upstate New York.”

“I suppose that’s better than having him learn to type all over again
at Fort Benjamin Harrison.”
Or, God forbid, putting him into a combat arm. He once more
pictured Tim bouncing toward a European death in some jeep, the
same mental image he’d had at Christmas, but filled in this time with
the detail of the white sidewalls he’d seen in the picture on Mary’s
desk.
“Give me until tomorrow morning,” said Sorrell. “I’ll do what I can
to get him back to you smooth and unscratched. The way you like
them, right? At least sometimes.” Getting no response, Sorrell added
hopefully, “I’m still that way myself, you know.”
Fuller laughed. “Thanks, Andy.”

CHAPTER TWENTY-NINE

June 22–24, 1955
The bugle notes of reveille, tinny and recorded, reached the barracks
at Fort Polk by means of a loudspeaker, but Tim had no need for
them. He had already been up for an hour, on his knees in the
nondenominational chapel. As on other mornings, he was finding
that its pale brown walls, unadorned by any graven image, lent a sort
of abstract severity to the devotions he was trying to perform.
If the First World War had seemed to hang over Fort Dix, thrown
together in 1917, it was the Second that shadowed Fort Polk,
onetime center of the Louisiana Maneuvers, whose millions of
broiled and dehydrated participants had, more than a decade ago,
included Tim’s uncle Alan. Recently reopened to quarter the First
Armored Division, Polk was still operating at only a fraction of its
1940s self.
The built-in shade that Mary Johnson had described as a constant
of New Orleans architecture didn’t seem to figure at this installation
seven miles from the town of Leesville. He’d arrived after a confusing
final week in Jersey. First he’d gotten orders for the U.S. Army
Information School at Fort Slocum, but then an assignment officer
overruled them on the grounds that he was already better than most
USAIS graduates at the things they got taught. And so he’d been put
in this on-the-job training slot instead: working on The Kisatchian, the
camp newspaper here at Polk, where he’d shown up carrying the
same suitcase he’d taken from D.C. to Fort Dix back in January.
He’d also brought along a Davy Crockett cap rifle, a friendly present
from several other shitbirds in basic, where he’d been widely
conceded to be the single worst marksman in the company. So
much, he thought, for above-average “coordination.”

When he finished his prayers this morning, he’d be reporting to
Major Brillam, The Kisatchian’s editor. Tim liked him and the work,
which could involve almost anything: rewriting recipes submitted for
publication by officers’ wives; printing the official instructions for
dealing with radiation skin burns; editing a local enlistee’s original
story on the remarkable intelligence of somebody’s pet ostrich in
Metairie.
This week he’d been laying out stories on the UN’s tenthanniversary celebrations in San Francisco. Ike had talked of “my
country’s unswerving loyalty” to the organization, and old pictures
from its founding—some with Alger Hiss seated behind Secretary of
State Stettinius, just as he’d sat behind FDR at Yalta—had been
reappearing over the wire services. I will not turn my back on Alger
Hiss. Forget what Acheson had said; was there anyone, Tim
wondered, who had watched his back around Hiss?
Days at The Kisatchian were longer than they’d been at the Star,
and Tim tended to find most of his off-duty entertainment in the
paper’s office. He almost always wound up back there after dinner in
the mess or a late trip to the PX. There were so few books on the
base that he’d yesterday bought an issue of Good Housekeeping,
since it promised a whole novella by John P. Marquand. The
barracks radio was always tuned to the fights or hillbilly music, and
he realized that by the time his enlistment was over, most of the
serials to which he’d remained so faithful would be gone from the
dial. He’d once driven into Leesville with some guys in his squad to
see This Is Cinerama! and on the base they’d all been made to
watch Face to Face with Communism, an armed-forces feature
about an air force sergeant spending a nightmare furlough in a U.S.
town that appeared to have been taken over by American
Communists. Happy ending: the sergeant learns it was just a roleplaying exercise by the vigilant locals.
Major Brillam always called him “son,” as Potter had, and the
officer had been impressed to discover in his file that Tim had

worked for a United States senator. He threw as much responsibility
his way as possible. The other week he’d told him that “We’re trying
to avoid creating more Ronald Alleys,” Alley being a thirty-four-yearold officer who’d betrayed his fellow POWs in Korea; since one of
Brillam’s buddies worked in Indoctrination, the two officers had
decided that Tim should talk to a class on the base about his
experience with Potter’s atrocity hearings.
The recruits snickered when Tim wrote on the blackboard and his
chalk line wandered uphill, but they all took notes and one or two
wound up regarding him as a person of worldly experience. However
fraudulent that had made him feel, the episode did encourage him to
believe that he was doing something purposeful. The same went for
his work on the paper. The other day he’d written a story on an
operation by the “Winds of Freedom” campaign, which had launched
a fusillade of hydrogen-filled balloons from a field in Bavaria.
Designed to explode at thirty thousand feet over Czechoslovakia, the
balloons had showered down pamphlets listing Free World radio
frequencies for the captive citizens below. The Czech UN delegate
had expressed annoyance at the provocation, prompting Tim to write
that “the winds are blowing, literally and otherwise, from West to
East.” Major Brillam later told him that the “otherwise” was okay, but
the average cracker wasn’t going to know what the Sam Hill “literally”
meant.
What was the motto his doctor pal at Fort Dix had taught him?
First do no harm? Well, when he couldn’t be doing something useful,
that’s what he now vowed to do in the world: no harm to others or
himself. He would keep his head down, the way he had on the
obstacle course while crawling on his stomach with live ammunition
flying overhead, or even the way he’d kept it down during the rollercoaster scenes in This Is Cinerama!
Lingering in the chapel, he checked his watch and closed his eyes
to say the last of his prayers, but all that came to mind, yet again,

was his failed attempt at confession, at St. Francis Xavier in
Manhattan, on the Saturday afternoon before he’d left Fort Dix.
Bless me, Father, for I have sinned. It has been eighteen months
since my last confession.
He’d been able to hear Father Davett, identified by the nameplate
on the confessional, shifting on his bench behind the sliding panel.
The “eighteen months” had made the priest anticipate something
exceptional, so he was moving closer for a better listen.
I missed my Easter duty, Tim had continued, hopelessly, aware of
how much further he had to go.
Father Davett: Yes?
I was in love with a man. The memory of Tommy McIntyre’s voice
—“You are in love”—had seemed to find him in yet some further
abyss, a pit of lying.
How old are you?
Twenty-three.
Did you have impure thoughts about this man?
No.
He’d said it with conviction, believing that to say yes would be
bearing false witness against the ecstatic, starlit thoughts he’d
always had of Hawk.
Somehow he’d tried to keep going, to see if he could reach a
merciful middle ground.
Father Davett (confused): Did you have carnal awareness of this
man?

Yes.
Have you ceased to?
Yes.
Are you sincerely sorry?
No.
Father Davett (exasperated): Then why are you here?
I intend to stop. I have stopped.
That is not enough. You must be sincerely sorry.
I can’t be sincerely sorry.
How could he explain? Without Hawk’s love in return, his own love
had become unbearable. He had stopped because what they did
together could not be sprung from the world of shame and
suppressed terror and blackmail, from Tommy McIntyre’s extortive
market of secrets. He’d once believed that he and Hawkins had lifted
themselves above the wicked Earth by doing what they did in bed,
but that sense had been replaced by a realization that joining their
bodies only chained them to the electrified cage of who had what on
whom.
His love had been real—literally divine, if that meant inspired from
above. He would now renounce—as he’d refused to, the first
morning after, at St. Peter’s—but he still would not regret.
Maintaining this last distinction might be the only courage he ever
showed in the world.
You must, Father Davett had finally said, be sincerely sorry. That
is demanded for every mortal sin.

As if on a diving board, he had remained unable to leap. I can’t.
He’d realized that the priest thought all of this a quibble, that he
would have preferred him to lie, to make a good confession by
making a bad one.
Renunciation shows consciousness of guilt. Therefore you are
sorry.
No. I can’t give that to God.
Why not?
It’s too much.
Nothing is too much to give God.
I’ve already returned to Him the best gift He ever gave me.
What is that?
The man I loved.
After that, Father Davett had slid shut the screen, driving him like a
moneychanger from the temple.
Even so, even now at Fort Polk, he craved the forgiveness and
release that the deep-voiced, by-the-book priest might have
provided. And he knew that he would try again.

THE NATION

Washington, D.C., bureau
June 22, 1955
Dear Laughlin,

You’re fondly remembered in Potter’s office. About an hour
ago McIntyre gave me an airmail stamp and suggested I write
you. “A foine idea,” as he might say.
You’ve just missed a great show here. McCARTHY: THE
COMEBACK. The audience found it so unintentionally hilarious
it closed two nights after opening. The plot is easily
summarized:
A rare dry weekend had left the leading man well enough to
come to the Hill on Monday morning, day before yesterday,
carrying with him the text for a resolution. It insisted that
President Dulles bring up the “satellite” nations when he talks to
the Russians in Geneva next month.
But the Democrats had a handy high horse to ride in
opposition: “Sir, do you not sufficiently trust the President, a man
from your own party, to let him negotiate with a free hand?”
Before long even Knowland and Co. had to hop on. The whole
bunch of them voted the thing down, 77–4, a couple of minutes
ago.
Nonetheless, for two days our Savonarola of the Dairylands
must have felt alive again. He chewed up the Foreign Relations
Committee calendar and had a dozen reporters following him
around, as if it were the grand old days of ’53 and he’d just
hounded another Jewish bookworm to the poorhouse. Every
flashbulb that popped threw a smile onto his face, like he’d
thrown one more jigger of bourbon down his gullet.
Bob Stevens, Secretary Milquetoast, has resigned to go back
to supervising the family fortune. (Do they allow you to include
actual armed-forces news like this in that paper you’re putting
out?) More significantly, Ridgway has retired, because he
realizes the army he gave his life to is now obsolete. The Air
Force will conduct the next war, while his old branch of the
service will be left to herd radioactive civilians through the
bombed city streets. (Thanks, by the way, for that touching bit of
meteorology you sent, the balloon story. But put your own finger
into the wind and you’ll begin to feel which way it’s really

blowing. Did you somehow miss seeing the real papers the day
the Warsaw Pact was formed last month?)
McIntyre insists you’re fleeing some great sorrow, but won’t
say which. Forgive me, Laughlin, but you don’t look to me as if
you’re built for a life of passion.
See you when you’re back here on a pass sometime. My new
painter girlfriend will cook you a meal. She extends abstract
expressionism right onto the dinner plate.
Regards,
Kenneth Woodforde, 4-F
P.S. About Potter’s little burp of courage last year: can you tell
me if there’s more to the story than’s been told? Strictly off the
record, of course.
“You’ve heard of Darkness at Noon, Miss Johnson?”
“Yes, Fuller.”
“Well, the summer solstice has given us brightness at dusk. Or at
least what should be dusk. Too nice not to be out in. I’m leaving a
little earlier than usual.”
“Leaving earlier than early, you mean.”
“Leaving now, to be precise.”
McCarthy’s Geneva resolution had sent the Bureau of
Congressional Relations into action on Monday morning, but victory
had proved so easy that by Wednesday there wasn’t much left to do.
Now, on Friday, things were even slower, and once Fuller left, Mary
decided she would answer Tim’s latest letter before going home
herself. In her reply she would take care—as Tim always did—never
to mention Fuller. Unnatural as this seemed, she knew it was for the
best. A more difficult task would be responding to the kind of

political-religious tract that Tim’s most recent letter, like the one or
two before it, had started to resemble.
She at least had quiet enough in which to concentrate, Beverly
having left early, too. Quite stagestruck now, Bev had a part in the
Bethesda Players’ production of The Little Foxes; Jerry was helping
to make her hoop skirt with some wire he’d brought home from the
hardware store he still worked at.

Department of State
Washington, D. C.
June 24, 1955
Dear Tim,
Well, it’s a silent Friday afternoon here, befitting a world on
which peace has apparently descended. Why didn’t anyone
think of it before? I refer to this Molotov resolution out in San
Francisco—a stroke of genius, I should say, simply to proclaim
the arrival of “peace, cooperation and friendship.”
I can imagine what you
Someone had entered the office. With no one at any other desk—
Miss Lightfoot’s replacement had left early, too—Mary got up to greet
whoever it was.
The visitor, heavyset but attractive, perhaps a bit over forty,
motioned for her to sit back down at her typewriter while he strode
toward her.
“Miss Johnson, you don’t remember me. The name’s Fred Bell.”
“I’m afraid I don’t.”

“The last time I saw you, a couple of years ago, I was bringing you
a cracker with some fish on it. At the Estonian embassy. Actually the
Lithuanian. We were borrowing the place.”
“Oh,” said Mary, bits of that sad little evening coming back to her.
She recalled her skirt feeling too long, and Fuller taking off into the
night.
“I own some shoe factories up in Massachusetts. I’m on the
deportees’ committee.”
“Yes,” said Mary. “I’m remembering something about a violinist.”
“Pretty close,” said Mr. Bell. “Oboe. My cousin. The one who gets
to play music in Tallinn. The other cousin, the peasant, is still
deported, still on a Soviet collective. You and me also talked about
eggs. And then your handsome boss whisked you away.”
“What are you doing here?”
“Losing. Like always.” He laughed. “A bunch of us rushed down on
Monday when we got word of the resolution being introduced. We
were dumb enough to think we could help it pass. Real controversial,
wasn’t it? ‘Please, maybe, could you just possibly, if it isn’t too rude,
bring up the satellites? Oh, too provocative? Too dangerous? Sorry!
We apologize!’”
Mary nodded, deciding not to mention that she’d spent two days
marshaling votes against the proposal, even though she’d known in
her heart that its only objectionable aspect was its toxic sponsor.
“A couple of us have stayed in town making the rounds. Without
much point, as usual. But I’ve seen everybody I could on the Hill and
figured I’d come over here. I still have your handsome boss’s card.”
He showed it to her. “I’ve learned that barging in has more chance of
success than calling ahead.”

“I’m afraid that both the handsome boss and his boss aren’t in.”
Mr. Bell shrugged. “More of my luck. Maybe I should have called
ahead.” He put Fuller’s card back in his wallet. “You’re pretty
handsome yourself. You can use that word with women, can’t you?”
He’d almost, Mary thought, said “dames.”
“I’m not sure I’m old enough for ‘handsome,’” she replied.
“Have dinner with me.”
“You’re married. A guess.”
“I’m married. A good guess.”
As if another voice were talking for her, she asked: “Where would
you like to go?”

CHAPTER THIRTY

July 23–24, 1955
Tim had sweated through his first shirt on the five-hour bus ride from
Fort Polk, but here in Mr. Johnson’s remarkably cool library a second
one was holding up fine. He had put in for his weekend pass nearly a
month ago, and Mary had promised they would have some time
alone after dining with her father. Tim and Mr. Johnson had been
conversing for the past ten minutes, while they waited for her to
finish getting ready. About a quarter of the books in the room
appeared to be bound in leather, and about half of those were in
French. Mr. Johnson had explained that on his mother’s side he was
a Claurin.
“Things are looking up,” the older man now declared. “Never
before have East and West wasted so little time reaching a
deadlock.”
Ike was coming home from the Geneva conference tomorrow,
having proposed joint aerial reconnaissance and the sharing of
military blueprints between America and Russia. It remained doubtful
that the Soviets would say yes.
Tim laughed politely before replying. “Nixon thinks the summit
‘cleared the air,’” he said, venturing toward a difference of opinion
with his host. “But I think it made things worse.”
“I can’t claim the East-West bon mot as my own,” Mr. Johnson
responded. “It came out of some man’s column in the TimesPicayune.”
Mary had warned her father about the recent overheated
expressions of faith and politics in Tim’s letters, and Mr. Johnson

was trying to keep the conversation light. His daughter decided that
she would do the same. Entering the library, Mary declared, “I’m
always happy to hear Nixon criticized. Even if it’s from all the way
over on that side.”
More perfumed than Tim remembered, she leaned over and gave
him a sisterly kiss.
“Very Audrey Hepburn, no?” she asked, touching her new shorter
haircut. “That’s the intention, anyway.”
“I think I miss the style you had,” Mr. Johnson said, wistfully. “Your
mother’s hair fell to her waist every night as she came into our bed.”
The phrasing jarred them all with its intimacy, and Mary wound up
returning the conversation to affairs of state, explaining that the
president’s cable from Geneva, describing the progress of the
conference, had arrived at the State Department early Thursday
afternoon, just before her departure for New Orleans on the ovenlike
Crescent. “So I was very up-to-date. On that and other things
besides. We even knew about poor Cordell Hull.” The death of
FDR’s secretary of state had occurred only this afternoon, but on
Thursday morning awareness of its imminence had sent some
longtime employees scrambling for black crêpe to hang, once Mr.
Hull was gone, from the department’s Twenty-first Street windows.
Strong spicy smells were coming from the kitchen. Josephine, a
Negro woman who took care of Mary’s father during the week, had
come to cook their meal. “It’s a treat to have you here,” Mr. Johnson
insisted to Tim, “and it will be a treat to have Josephine’s dinner.
Most weekends I subsist on something frozen that she’s left, or a
plate of red beans and rice that I can manage to make myself.” He
looked skeptically at Tim’s thin frame. “Are they feeding you well
enough?”
“Oh, just fine, sir.”

“Well,” said Mary, “they’re already getting Capitol Hill ready for
your return. They’ve finished the foundations on that new Senate
Office Building, the one going up where that little slum on First Street
used to be? They’ll have the whole thing done in a couple of years.”
She realized, suddenly, that she needed to concoct a fib. “I got all
of that from Beverly. I think I wrote you about how much time she
was spending on the Hill this spring.”
Tim, certain that she’d gotten this architectural update from
Hawkins, who visited the Capitol twice a week, just nodded.
Mary now surmised what he was thinking, which was not at all
what had made her worry. She had lied to protect a secret of her
own, not Tim’s feelings. She’d seen the construction herself, during
the two weekends Fred Bell had come down to Washington to see
her, weekends the two of them had spent in a little room at the top of
the Carroll Arms. Each Sunday afternoon, when Fred would phone
his wife in Massachusetts to report on all the preparation he was
doing for the next day’s lobbying, she would take a stroll around the
Hill that took her past the construction site.
“I may not come back to Washington at all,” said Tim, “but if I do I’ll
be your neighbor a couple of times a month. The Army Reserves in
D.C. are so hard up they drill in a State Department lecture room!
Right at Twenty-first and C.”
His face flushed with nostalgia for the handful of visits he’d made
to Hawkins’ office. Mary saw his color rise and wondered how on
earth she’d be able to tell him what she had to.
Mr. Johnson excused himself to check on Josephine.
“You’re sure you won’t stay here tonight instead?” Mary asked
Tim. He’d checked into a guesthouse in the Quarter. “Dauphine
Street is quieter than most, but still, it is a Saturday night, and—”

“You’re forgetting I grew up a few blocks from Times Square,” he
said, laughing. “Trust me, this is nothing! And if you’re worried about
the money, remember: I’m making seventy-eight whole dollars a
month on top of three meals a day and all the milk I can drink.”
“I need to talk to you about something after dinner.”
“Are you getting back together with Paul?”
“No, no. But it does concern an engagement.”
“Beverly Phillips and Jerry Baumeister!”
Mr. Johnson was coming back into the library.
“No, not them,” she whispered. “It’s somebody else.”
“Josephine’s boy,” Mr. Johnson announced with a certain wonder,
“wants her to take him to Disneyland.” The amusement park’s
opening had been all over television last week.
Mary looked at Tim from the corner of her eye. No, he hadn’t
guessed the news she had to tell him.
“Fantasyland?” he asked her father, trying to ascertain which
precinct of Disneyland interested Josephine’s boy particularly.
“Frontierland?”
Mary excused herself to get a pack of cigarettes from her
bedroom, and once there, standing still with her left hand on the
dresser, she remembered the conversation that Fuller had drawn her
into on Monday afternoon, just before close of business.
Getting married? she’d asked, incredulously.
Having children, too, no doubt, he’d answered.
Why, Fuller?

Why not?
Because you’re—
Because I am, even so, good value for her money.
No, you’re not.
He’d said nothing, just smiled.
Why now?
A hitch in time saves nine. He’d begun moving toward the door by
that point.
Should I say anything to him? she’d asked. I’ll be seeing him this
weekend, you know, when I’m back home.
I know. I keep reading the letters you deliberately leave open on
your desk.
What should I tell him, Fuller?
That it makes no difference. He’d already taken his hat from the
clothes tree.
Of course it makes a difference, she’d protested.
Does Mrs. Bell make a difference, Miss Johnson?
You’re a son of a bitch.
Yes, I am. He’d then put on the hat.
No, you’re not.
No, I’m not, he’d said, without any archness, before asking,
quietly, for a simple favor: Make it easy on him.

She now lit one of the cigarettes and returned to the library, where
there seemed to be a lull in the conversation between her father and
their guest.
“Tim has just finished explaining to me the difference between
Frontierland and Fantasyland,” Mr. Johnson told his daughter. “But
we’ve concluded that Josephine’s son wants to go to another land
entirely.”
“Which is that?” asked Mary.
“Tomorrowland,” said her father.
Tim’s brown eyes were wet and huge. She could see that, in the
time she’d been out of the room, he had guessed the identity of the
groom.

“Hello, darlin’! Why so sad?”
He thought the voice might be a prostitute’s, like the one he’d
heard on Bourbon Street a half hour ago, but here on Dauphine, a
little before midnight, the words were coming not from a doorway but
a low second-floor balcony, and the voice belonged to a man. There
were two men, actually, near the railing. One of them had curly gray
hair; the other, the one who had spoken, was somewhat younger,
maybe in his thirties, but already balding.
“I’m okay,” Tim called up to him.
“Heavens, really? We’d hate to see you when you were under the
weather. You come on up here.” He pointed to an entrance that led
first to a back garden and then the apartment upstairs.
Still struggling, as he’d been for the last two hours, with the single
faint image he had retained of the woman he now thought of as her,

the way she’d appeared last year on the Hotel Washington’s rooftop,
Tim went into the garden. Passing flowers thick and fragrant, their
stems stronger-looking than the white wrought iron of the bannister
and balcony, he fought off another picture, recently assembled by his
imagination, in which Mr. and Mrs. Hawkins Fuller and their children
sat surrounded by bicycles and wrapping paper on a Christmas
morning.
The younger man already had a drink for him. “I’m Wel, short for
Jeffrey Wellison. And you are?”
“Timothy Laughlin.”
The older man, introduced by Wel as Mr. Shaw, extended his hand
while clicking a Tums between his teeth. Tim could see a roll of the
tablets lying on the tray with the pitcher of drinks. Very tall and
possessed of fine posture, Mr. Shaw was probably no more than
forty-five. His hair—Tim could see this close up—was more than
curly; it was like coiled wire. His features had a Negro aspect, and
Tim wondered if he might be an octoroon or even a mulatto, terms
he knew from the movies. Whatever he was, the man’s whole
manner marked him as an aristocrat.
“And tell us,” he asked, “what brings you to New Orleans, Mr.
Laughlin?”
“I’m in the army.”
“You’re not really!” shrieked Wel. “We would have welcomed you
with trumpets if we’d known! As it is, you should sit down.”
“Are you on a pass?” Mr. Shaw asked.
“Yes, I’m a private, a communications specialist at Fort Polk. I go
back tomorrow.”

“Now, Clay, you heard him. He’s on a pass, so making one in his
direction would be redundant.”
Mr. Shaw laughed apologetically at his companion’s remark, and
peeled another Tums from the roll. Tim found himself surprised that
anyone living in this city, awash in spices, might actually suffer from
heartburn.
Wel poured a little sachet of powder into his own drink. “Atoms for
peace!” he exclaimed, lifting the glass in what appeared to be a toast
to himself.
“Forgive Mr. Wellison’s flamboyance,” said Mr. Shaw. “The
granules are just a sweetener.”
“Sure they are,” said Wel, before stage-whispering the word
“Benzedrine” in Tim’s direction.
Mr. Shaw returned a bit helplessly to the notion of atoms for
peace, making it the occasion for a general toast: “To the spirit of
Geneva. And to Private Laughlin’s arrival in our city.”
Tim took a sip of what he guessed was a martini. He followed it
with a shrimp whose strong sauce Mr. Shaw seemed to be avoiding.
“There is no spirit of Geneva,” said Wel. “In fact the man on the
radio was saying that China’s going to attack Formosa before all the
bigwigs have cleared out of Switzerland. While everybody’s
distracted, the Russians won’t be able to restrain the Chinks. Not
Chinks. He called them something else. Chiclets?”
“Chicoms, I suspect,” said Mr. Shaw.
“Is he right, honey?”
“Yes,” said Tim.

“Well,” said Mr. Shaw, with the slight nervousness that seemed
habitual to him in Mr. Wellison’s presence, “if any world war does
break out, we have Private Laughlin here to defend us.”
“And plenty of vodka to offer the invaders!” cried Wel, suddenly
agreeable.
“I thought it was the Chinese who were coming,” said Mr. Shaw,
gently.
With a volume that startled the two older men, Tim all at once
declared: “Bulganin wants the Chinese to act as ‘observers’ in
Europe! Peacekeepers!”
Mr. Shaw recovered from his surprise and shook his head,
agreeing to the irony and injustice of the prospect. Wel, losing
interest in the international situation, busied himself by emptying one
half-full bowl of peanuts into another.
Embarrassed by his own volubility, Tim changed the subject,
asking Mr. Shaw: “What line are you in, sir?”
“So sweet!” exclaimed Wel. “He makes you sound like a shoe
salesman, Clay. And he sounds a little like Dorothy Kilgallen.”
Mr. Shaw made a forbearing expression: “I’m in international
trade,” he explained to Tim. “Imports and exports. Mostly putting
other importers and exporters together with one another.”
“Clay’s a matchmaker,” said Wel, who was combing his hair in
front of a heavily framed mirror. “When he travels the world, I feed
the cat here and have his mail forwarded.”
“How long have you been friends?” Tim asked.
“About ten years,” Mr. Shaw explained. “Since just after the war.”

“We’re in the ‘just friends’ stage now,” Wel added. “Sisters. It
comes to that with the seven-year itch. Well, seven months in our
case.” He laughed at Tim’s evident perplexity. “I don’t think he’s seen
the movie, Clay. He was probably at The Seven Little Foys instead.
Anywho,” Wel announced, picking up his cigarette lighter from the
tray, “I’m going to leave you two and mosey back home to Chartres
Street.”
“You don’t live here?” Tim asked. The apartment wasn’t just fancy;
it appeared to be enormous.
Wel shook his head. “More convenient all around.” He gave Tim a
peck on the cheek—“Say hello to all our fighting men!”—and made a
fast exit.
“May I freshen your drink, Timothy?”
“Thank you, Mr. Shaw.”
Without Wel, the room itself, however ornate, seemed to acquire a
more masculine aspect. Mr. Shaw now appeared almost huge, more
handsome and less guarded. Tim had the sense that Wel’s
departure had occurred because he’d completed his work by
bringing a guest here. Looking toward what seemed to be the largest
bedroom, beyond a set of French doors, Tim noticed a silver crucifix
attached to one of the walls. In a corner stood a black bullwhip, like
something the Lone Ranger might have captured.
Mr. Shaw, topping off their drinks, saw him looking and laughed.
“Don’t be alarmed, Private Laughlin. That’s left over from Mardi
Gras.”
The martini glass, with its high center of gravity, threatened to spill.
Mr. Shaw took it from his hand and set it on the table, then placed an
arm over his shoulders. The exotic-looking man sighed with what
seemed a craving for something deeper than sex, some wildly

imbalanced alignment. Tim recognized it through an awareness of
the same desire—its other, symmetrical half—within himself.
“I think you should stay here tonight,” said Mr. Shaw. “You’ll be
perfectly safe.” He pointed to the whip. “We can put that between us,
like Tristan’s sword.”
There was a brief silence, perhaps encouraging. And yet the
gentlemanly Mr. Shaw soon sensed, whatever might be in the air,
that his guest was too sad and nervous to go much further. So he
made them both some coffee, told some army stories of his own (a
Bronze Star rested not far from the crucifix), and listened to an
anguished outpouring about Hawkins Fuller. After an hour or so
passed, he was walking Tim to his rooming house across Dauphine
Street, and telling him: “You’ll hear again and again that he’s ‘not
worth it.’ And that will be true. It will also be the stupidest thing
anyone ever says to you.”

According to the Sunday-morning paper, two hundred and fifty
thousand children were receiving Communion in Rio de Janeiro this
weekend; Cardinal Spellman, in Brazil on a visit, had said a midnight
Mass prior to the huge outdoor Eucharist.
Sitting in the back of the cathedral in Jackson Square, Tim envied
the privileged innocence of these quarter million boys and girls he’d
just read about, but mostly he wondered what Saturday-night stories
might be told by the tired morning-after souls in his midst, right here
in New Orleans. He checked the bus ticket stuck in his missal—and
then noticed a small green light go on, indicating the presence of a
Father LeTour in the confessional just ten or twelve feet from the
pew.
It didn’t seem possible: all his life he had known only Saturday
confessions. But perhaps this city’s superabundance of temptation

necessitated a few freewheeling shortcuts toward forgiveness. He
noticed that three or four people had already lined up at the booth
with their still-brand-new sins—lucky, shadowed souls who within a
half hour would be kneeling at the altar rail, as newly innocent as any
Brazilian boy or girl.
On impulse, he acted: put his bus ticket back into the missal,
marked his seat in the pew with the book, and got up to join the line,
which was moving quickly. Father LeTour appeared to be passing
out absolution with the speed of a chaplain on the battlefield.
He would try not to think. He would try just to do it, to get back to
and then somehow past the point at which he had been refused by
Father Davett. He could not live forever without God’s full presence;
he could not—having last night understood that Hawkins was gone
forever—accept the permanent loss of God’s grace, too.
His mind raced with logic and analogy: McCarthy had called
Geneva a “dismal failure,” since there hadn’t been any talk of the
satellite countries, whose enslavement was the moral crux of the
whole Cold War. That was the truth—and shouldn’t the truth be
accepted even from a sinner? Furthermore, shouldn’t a sinner be
accepted if he told the truth? Which was to say, couldn’t he himself
be accepted back into the Church with just renunciation of what he
had done, unaccompanied by any admission of regret?
He had wanted to stay with Mr. Shaw last night. He had not been
very drunk, just sad and shocked over Hawkins’ engagement. Mr.
Shaw’s exotic allure, his potent combination of the hulking and
effeminate, had attracted him. There had been, as they’d sipped
coffee, one repelling moment—a gentle, last-ditch suggestion that he
put on what appeared to be a child’s set of pajamas—but more than
anything else Mr. Shaw had seemed manly and cherishing, qualities
that he himself, now denied both Hawk and God, desired intensely.

What had stopped him from getting into bed—he knew the whip
would never stay in its legendary place—had been the thought of
Hawk, who, he’d decided months ago, near the end, should be the
only man he would ever know in this way.
So, he now reasoned, while the person just ahead of him in line
entered the confessional: if Hawk had once been sin, he was now
the giver of chastity. Why couldn’t those two things cancel each other
out and let Timothy Laughlin go back to being what he’d once been?
Why couldn’t he, safely reunited with God, retire the active memory
of his earthly love, frame it like the picture of some dead loved
soldier on a mantelpiece?
“Bless me, Father, for I have sinned; it has been twenty-one
months since my last confession.”
No shifting, no sense of surprise from Father LeTour. The priest
replied in what Tim now recognized as a Cajun accent: “Yes, young
man?” The “young” sounding like “yoang.”
Tim had so often replayed his abortive confession to Father Davett
that he could now recite his own part from memory. But Father
LeTour seemed to be working from a different script, or none at all.
To each admission that emerged from Tim’s lips, the priest replied,
merely, Mmm-hmm.
“I intend to stop. I have stopped.”
“Mmm-hmm.”
“But I can’t say ‘I’m sorry.’ I can’t give that to God. It’s too much.
I’ve already returned to Him the best gift He ever gave me.”
Father LeTour at last came to soft-spoken life. “And what was
that?”
“The man I loved.”

“Did you give him back to God in the spirit of a gift?”
Tim had to admit that that hadn’t been the case; his return of
Hawkins to God had been grudging and desperate.
“No, Father.”
“Can you give him back to God in that spirit?”
“Yes!” said Tim, well above the confessional’s normal whisper. “I
can.”
“Then say three Hail Marys and do that. God loves you.”
A little before eleven a.m., with his two hands clutching the missal
and part of his mind unable to stop wondering why Father LeTour,
unlike Bishop Sheen, did not use the subjunctive—God love you—
Tim walked down the cathedral’s center aisle and received the Body
of Christ Our Lord.

CHAPTER THIRTY-ONE

September 25–28, 1955
“So, is it true?” asked Fred Bell. “Do they really stand him on a box
before the cameras roll?”
He and Mary had just seen the decidedly short Alan Ladd in The
McConnell Story.
“That’s what they say,” she answered. She hadn’t paid much
attention to the picture—neither the based-on-real-life heroics of the
title figure, nor the scratchy little voice of June Allyson as the air
ace’s perfect wife. Truth to tell, she would have been content not to
go to the movies at all, and to spend the evening as they’d spent the
whole afternoon, upstairs in the Carroll Arms, in bed with just room
service and each other—though minus the bottle of Hildebrandfamily beer that had been standing up, accusingly, in the ice bucket.
It was now half past twelve on Saturday night. The Sunday papers
had long since reached the streets, but here in a candy store a block
from the Ambassador Theater, Fred was displaying more interest in
the radio than in the already-obsolete Star, for which he’d just put
down his fifteen cents. A Washington news announcer was reporting
on a press conference still going on out in Denver, not far from
where the president had gone for a fishing vacation.
So much for the “digestive upset” that had been reported this
morning! The doctors were now admitting that Ike had had a heart
attack and was in an oxygen tent, and that Vice President and Mrs.
Nixon had “gone into seclusion, leaving their young daughters at
home on Tilden Street in the care of a trusted secretary.”

“Fred,” said Mary. “There’s a radio back in the hotel.” Which she
hoped he wouldn’t listen to once they got there. Fred might be only
the third lover she’d had, but of that small sample he was far and
away the best, full of ardor and eye contact; she was eager to get
back to doing just what June Allyson and Paul, staring at her through
the Hildebrand label, would no doubt disapprove of.
At last she felt Fred’s hand on the small of her back, urging her out
of the store and onto Eighteenth Street.
“Taxi!” he called.
But once the Diamond cab arrived at the curb, she heard him ask
not for the Carroll Arms but for Tilden Street.
“Where on Tilden?” the driver asked.
“Just drive down the three-thousand blocks. Past the embassies.”
“What are we doing?” asked Mary.
Fred continued instructing the driver. “I don’t know the exact
number, but there’ll be a little crowd on the lawn, newsmen and so
forth.”
“We’re going to the Nixons’,” said Mary, having just remembered
Tilden Street from the radio.
“Yeah,” said Fred. “To stand outside the house.”
“Why?”
“Because if this is the moment, I want to be there.”
“The moment when Ike dies?”
“The moment when we get a president who’ll actually fight, who’ll
roll them back.” He proceeded to review for her the vice president’s

steely anticommunist credentials. Sure, Nixon sometimes had to say
things against McCarthy or in favor of Geneva, but everybody knew
that the man who’d brought down Hiss and Helen Douglas would
stand up to the Russians—if he were blessed with his own
presidency.
“Blessed?” asked Mary, looking at Fred’s excited profile while a
string of Connecticut Avenue streetlamps flashed their glow onto and
off his skin. He appeared even more aroused than he’d been behind
the heavy curtains of their room in the Carroll Arms.
The car radio was explaining just how Nixon had learned the
seriousness of Ike’s condition, when the taxi caught up with the
twenty or so reporters and gawkers on the vice president’s front
lawn. At an upstairs window, behind sheer curtains, the silhouettes of
two small girls, delighted by the commotion, were jumping up and
down on a bed.
Fred told the cab to wait, and once on the sidewalk with Mary he
put some questions to a man with a microphone and a walkie-talkie.
No, he learned, there really wasn’t any news. The press conference
in Denver had just ended, and a heart specialist had flown out to
Colorado, but that was about it.
Mary took Fred’s arm and drew him back to the curb. “I want to
ask you something. Are you hoping that the president of the United
States will die?”
Fred paused for a moment’s thought before replying. “I’m hoping
the president will fight.”
“The current president,” Mary insisted. “You want to see the hero
of D-Day die for Estonia?”
He looked straight at her. “I landed on Utah Beach eleven years,
three months, and nineteen days ago. I do the arithmetic every
morning when I brush my teeth.”

There wasn’t much to say to that; she looked longingly at the cab.
“Maybe you should take it,” said Fred. “I’m too keyed up. I’ve got
to stay awhile more.”
“All right.”
“You’re not mad?”
“No. Confused maybe.”
He was already looking for a way to make it up to her. “How about
I pick you up for church?”
“No, thanks,” she said, laughing from sheer surprise. “I’m not
going by myself, and I’m not going with you, either.”
“Come on,” he cajoled, smiling in the mischievous way he ought to
be smiling back at the Carroll Arms, coaxing her over some new
threshold of adventurousness. “There’s a Polish church on Thirtysixth Street,” he explained. “Father Kaminsky does the eleveno’clock Mass, and he’s a spellbinder. I guarantee you he’ll have
something to say tomorrow morning.”
She looked at him disbelievingly, but he persisted, as if she were
only displaying a customer’s last bit of resistance toward the product
being offered: “I went to hear him once with a guy from the Polish
group that sometimes makes the rounds with us down here.”
“Fred, I am not going to Mass to pray for the ill health of Dwight D.
Eisenhower.”
“Well, I wouldn’t do that, either.”
“Let’s say you wouldn’t do that exactly.” She looked back toward
the cab, whose meter was still running. “Call me sometime before
you go back home.” She accepted a kiss, against her better

judgment, and got into the taxi, still carrying the copy of the Star from
the candy store.
Inside her place on P Street, she made herself a drink and climbed
into bed with the paper, passing up its stale front page in favor of the
book reviews and wedding announcements—“the ladies’ sports
pages,” Paul used to joke, though in Washington you would
sometimes find the groom’s name, not the bride’s, in the headline:
MR. HERBERT ENGAGED TO WED. No matter how pretty the future
Mrs. Herbert might be, her fiancé’s father had been governor of
Ohio, and that settled that.
There was the phenomenon again, in the upper-right-hand corner:
MARRIAGE OF MR. FULLER ANNOUNCED. The news was being spread
by his soon-to-be in-laws, Professor and Mrs. Chester Boardman of
Wellesley, Massachusetts, parents of Lucy Catherine, the fiancée.
“The bridegroom-elect, a deputy assistant secretary in the State
Department’s bureau of congressional relations, is the son of Mr. and
Mrs. Charles Fuller of New York City.” The little story had everything
right: St. Paul’s, the war record, Harvard, Paraguay, Oslo.
Mary put aside the paper and wondered if she’d even tease Fuller
about it on Monday. No, she could no longer do that. Too many
things had galloped beyond the pale, herself included maybe.
At least the item wouldn’t run anywhere near Fort Polk. She had
heard from Tim only once since New Orleans, a letter full of talk
about the Eucharist and the Russians’ persecution of Cardinal
Mindszenty. His merry side had been there in one of the margins—
an ink sketch of Major Brillam hurling an editorial thunderbolt against
whatever laxness had permitted weevils to invade the mess hall—
but mostly the letter shook with a febrile zeal that left her both upset
and envious. Fred, too, had this electric susceptibility, this touch of
true-believing that must be connected to male ardor in bed. The little
Irish tiger cub: she now remembered Fuller dropping that offhand

excuse when he arrived at the office even later than usual one
morning.
All of them, from Hawkins Fuller to Beverly Phillips, were dangling
from the world tonight, unaligned nations or shaky protectorates,
struggling toward independence or falling into unwise alliance. She
felt a pang for Paul and his simple marital urge. If she’d let things
turn out differently, the two of them might be climbing into bed right
now, turning off the television in some nice house in Alexandria.
She herself was caught between two banked fires. Her recent
pursuit of passion, for all its illicit pleasures, seemed at the moment
as obligatory as another person’s quest for security and the norm. If
she were truly carried away by love, and Fred, she might by now be
turning the handle of some basement printing press, cranking out the
latest stack of Free Estonia Now pamphlets, helping her man to turn
the tide. As it was, come Monday she and Fuller, if Ike remained
alive, would no doubt be spreading the message of continuity, steady
as she goes, to the fire-breathers on the Hill, shoring up all the
caution Fred wanted to blast away with liberty’s blowtorch.
She let the Star fall to the floor, and she clicked off the light.

“You know,” Senator Goldwater reflected, “I’d ten times rather play
cards with Hubert. Dick Nixon is one of the shiftiest sons of bitches
I’ve met since I got here in ’52.”
Fuller smiled, even tilted his head back to accentuate amusement,
though he really didn’t need to strive for effect. He liked this
handsome half-Jew, half-Episcopalian from Arizona.
“May I tell that to Mr. Morton?” he asked.
“You can tell it to the goddamn New York Times, for all I care,” said
Goldwater. “Though I know you won’t.”

“No, sir.”
Fuller stood up to leave, having gotten what he wanted—an
assurance that Goldwater, like the other bellicose senators he had to
visit, would throughout the tense coming days confine himself to
supporting get-well-Ike resolutions, and not overcompensate for any
appearance of governmental distraction by having America rattle its
missiles in their hardened silos. So far only McCarthy was believed
to be scenting opportunity within the crisis. Several reports since
Saturday had him thirsting anew for politics, not just Jim Beam.
“Two more stops to make,” said Fuller, shaking Goldwater’s hand.
But his progress toward Senator Hickenlooper’s office was halted in
Goldwater’s reception area by the sight of Senator Charles Potter
and Tommy McIntyre.
Citizen Canes was sturdily upright, his balding head under a
cheap, snap-brim Stratoliner that the missus had probably picked up
at Herzog’s, thinking it would make him look snazzy. Which was not
an adjective one would apply to McIntyre, with his rheumy eyes and
gin-blossomed cheeks. He appeared to need a couple of canes
more than Potter did.
“A pleasure, Senator,” said Fuller, extending his hand. “Even if this
accidental encounter doesn’t save me any labor. There’s no need, of
course, to come see you in this uncertain time. We know your
instincts will be superb.”
Tommy coughed. “You’re laying it on pretty thick today.”
Fuller, tilting back his head in the same move he’d used on
Goldwater, felt almost relieved that the broken-looking Irishman
hadn’t lost his nasty gab.
“I appreciate the compliment,” said Potter, catching sight of the
man he’d come to visit. He raised one of his canes and winked its
little electric light. “Barry!”

Goldwater waved him forward.
“I’m here to pick up my model,” Potter explained to Fuller. With the
excitement of a boy, he headed toward the inner office, pointing as
he went to one of several plastic miniatures of the RC-121, the
“flying radar station,” that were on display. Goldwater, a colonel in
the Air Force Reserves, had piloted the plane over the Pacific last
weekend.
Left alone with Tommy, Fuller was delayed in taking his leave by
some compliments the ravaged little man had to offer.
“Congratulations on your engagement. I saw mention made of it in
the Star.”
“Thank you, McIntyre.”
“I’m sure she’s a beautiful girl.”
“Very.”
“I lost my girl almost a month ago.” Tommy shifted his gaze to the
window. He had a look of sheer agony, and the dampness on his
eyes had swollen into actual tears.
My girl? Was this, Fuller wondered, remembering Tim’s piece of
the story, the drunken woman in Michigan, the labor widow
supposed to be at the heart of McCarthy’s implosion?
“I’m sorry to hear that.”
Tommy’s face turned angry, and not so much toward the world as
toward Hawkins Fuller in particular. “One can’t count the number of
women who have been betrayed by men, nor the number who will
be. What’s your girl’s name again?”
“Boardman,” said Fuller. “Lucy Boardman.”

“That’s right, that’s right,” McIntyre responded, as if to suggest he
was updating the police files he kept in his head. “By the way, back
at the office we don’t hear nearly enough from your friend, Private
Laughlin.”
“What are you hearing from the constituents? Good wishes for the
president’s health, I imagine?”
“Actually,” said Tommy, “most of the wires concern the acquittal of
those apes who killed the Till boy down in Mississippi. It’s nice to
know more than a few people don’t believe a colored fellow should
necessarily be beaten to death for whistling at a white woman.”
The remark vibrated with Tommy’s shrill sympathy for the
oppressed, but it also carried a threatening whiff, an intimation that
Fuller, a sexual trangressor himself, must find stories like the Till
boy’s particularly unsettling.
Fuller confined himself to some cool, safe sarcasm: “‘No Negroes
on the jury because none are registered to vote in the county.’ That
was the official local explanation. Which I suppose we’ll report with a
straight face over the Voice of America.”
“A nice part of the country for your boy to be in.”
“It’s time for me to call my office,” said Fuller. He tipped his hat to
avoid shaking Tommy’s hand, and when he got to a pay phone at the
end of the corridor he rang the bureau.
Mary picked up.
“I was expecting to hear Beverly,” said Fuller.
“She’s down the hall collecting some telexes.”
“Why isn’t the new girl doing that? We do have a receptionist now,
don’t we?”

“She left early. She’s gotten engaged, as a matter of fact. Just at
lunchtime. Her mother came by to take her out for a celebration.”
“There’s a lot of that going around. And the mothers seem to like
it.”
“Well, my mother’s dead, Fuller.”
“So’s mine, almost.”
“Let me get your messages.”
Cold as ice, thought Fuller. Things could not be going well with the
married shoemaker.
“Congressmen Lovre and Dies returned your calls,” said Mary.
“And Senator Pastore’s office phoned—nothing urgent. Also, the
boss has talked to C. D. Jackson, who’s come down to the White
House from New York. Everything seems to be fine. Mr. Morton says
there’s no need for you to see Senator Bridges, or even Welker.”
“Good,” said Fuller. “The natives aren’t restless. Ike can breathe
easy in his oxygen tent.”
“Last but not least,” said Mary, “your fiancée phoned to say that
she’ll be coming by the office at five-thirty. She’d like for the two of
you to go out for an early dinner and a movie.”
“What’s playing?” Fuller asked.
“I highly don’t recommend The McConnell Story. June Allyson and
Alan Ladd.”
Have you ever frequented a Washington, D.C., establishment
called the Jewel Box, at the corner of Sixteenth and L streets?
The tufted purple walls. The bartender who looks a little like Alan
Ladd.

“Miss Johnson, you’ll need to ring the future Mrs. Fuller and tell
her that Monday is my night out with the boys.”

A day after their surprise wedding at Grossinger’s, Eddie Fisher and
Debbie Reynolds were in D.C. The ceremony had been put off until
Monday night, in deference to Yom Kippur. “Eddie is of the Jewish
faith,” reported the wire-service story in the New Orleans Item. It was
with a similar sense of responsibility that the bridegroom had
postponed the couple’s honeymoon, so that he could keep a
commitment to perform for the Coca-Cola bottlers holding their
convention at Washington’s Statler Hotel.
“So, does this go in?” asked Private John Nontone, holding the
Eddie-and-Debbie clipping. Though a day old, the story might still
find its way onto the “Lighter Side” page of The Kisatchian.
“Yep,” said Tim, speaking from his experience at the Evening Star
and almost six months here. “Eddie is a vet. He was even in Korea.
I’ll rewrite it to highlight that.”
“You’re the boss,” said Nontone, a twenty-year-old from Delaware
who’d arrived at the base three weeks ago.
“You want one of these?” asked Tim, offering Nontone a cookie
from the package that had just arrived.
“God, they’re awful,” said Nontone, after a single bite.
“I know.”
“I hope your mother or your girl didn’t make them.”
“A friend’s girl,” Tim explained, as he went to work on a page
layout. “I guess it’s the thought that counts.”

Gloria Rostwald, Kenneth Woodforde’s painter girlfriend, was the
baker, and the cookies she’d produced resembled little cinderblocks.
They were cookies trying hard to be something less frivolous than
cookies; the gray squares wanted you to know that they would no
more be caught wearing sprinkles or icing than one of their maker’s
paintings would sport a representational figure.
The box they’d come in had contained no note from the baker,
only one from Woodforde, written on Saturday night and urging Tim
to be careful with the enclosed edibles:
Unlike Eisenhower, you might have real digestive problems after
eating these. That was a nice little smokescreen, don’t you
think? Here’s hoping Nixon, now that he’s in charge, doesn’t add
a year to your enlistment. As it is, the Italians are one election
away from a Communist government (yes, people do choose
such things), so NATO may not prove much in the way of a first
line of defense for the good old USA. Which I’ve started to see
more than enough of in my (old) Chevrolet. The magazine has
me out in the hinterlands looking for hot progressive prospects
for next year’s elections. I’ll let you know who they are as soon
as I find any.—KW
Once he finished answering Francy’s latest letter—ducking her
exhortation that he come home for Christmas—Tim would have to
send Woodforde’s girlfriend a thank-you note, maybe with a p.s.
telling Woodforde himself that, if leprosy could be pushed back, then
communism could, too. The sermon during Sunday’s radio Mass for
shut-ins, which Tim had listened to before going to church on the
post, had been all about advances being made against the disease
in Dr. Schweitzer’s lab and Father Damien’s old colony. What, the
radio celebrant had wondered, should Christians do when such a
familiar symbol of dispossession and God’s mysterious ways
became extinct? Rejoice!

“Here’s another one,” said Nontone, coming back with a second
clipping. “In?”
The item concerned the decision of Marie Dionne, one of the
quintuplets, now past twenty, to return to the convent she’d left,
homesick, the year before.
“Out,” said Tim, leery of letting Major Brillam think he was riding
his own hobbyhorses onto the pages of The Kisatchian. Around the
base he was known, cheerfully enough, as a holy roller, even if when
applied to him the term meant something different from what it did in
the Louisiana hamlets just beyond Fort Polk’s perimeter.
Actually, the Dionne story interested Tim quite a bit, because these
days—in a way he hadn’t allowed himself in years—he was thinking
a lot about the seminary, and how he might apply once he’d finished
up with the army. Now that he was past Hawk, had made his
renunciation and been reconciled to the Church, he was beginning to
believe he might be allowed to move beyond the whole issue of his
“tendencies”—as he’d so far managed to do here in the army. He
didn’t know whether he had a real calling for the priesthood, but he
cherished the idea that he might still receive one—a sudden,
glorious annunciation that could happen anywhere, in the motor pool
or even the PX.
Right now, waiting for his mail (with army logic, letters arrived
more slowly than parcels), he went back to reading his biography of
Cardinal Mindszenty. He had arrived at the prelate’s “Statement of
November 18, 1948,” made just weeks before the Russians arrested
him, forced him into a clown’s costume, and beat him with
truncheons:
Such a systematic and purposeful net of propaganda lies—a
hundred times disproved and yet a hundred times spread anew
—has never been organized against the seventy-eight

predecessors in my office. I stand for God, for the Church and
for Hungary. This responsibility has been imposed upon me by
the fate of my nation, which stands alone, an orphan in the
whole world. Compared with the sufferings of my people, my
own fate is of no importance.
Tim could feel in this pronouncement the peace and strength that
certainty give, a serene immunity from persecution or even simple
need. He had returned to the book a half-dozen times yesterday, and
would get back to it as soon as he opened the two envelopes
Nontone was now handing him.
One had been sent by his mother, who these days addressed him
with the nervous politeness someone might employ in a first
approach to a skittish Korean orphan. Today she was asking what
he’d like to have for his birthday, still five weeks away.
The second envelope appeared to have no return address, just a
Washington postmark, but there was, Tim now noticed on the back
flap, a small handwritten name: Miss Beatrice Lightfoot. Inside,
neatly cut from the Sunday Star, was the item MARRIAGE OF MR.
FULLER ANNOUNCED. The bridegroom-elect, deputy assistant chief…
to be married on Saturday, December third.
Tim’s mind gave no thought to the sender, or to how she had
known where to find him. The anger and despair that swept through
him—worse now than that night in New Orleans—arose only from
his dispossession. He was seized by a sudden, dizzying lust for
Hawkins, for the long-ago smell and taste of him. He felt hollow,
literally, without the man he loved inside him.
This unexpected tumult would have been a furious temptation had
its object been anywhere near or obtainable. As things were, the
storm of sensation could only torment Tim like a punishment without
a crime, a midnight visit from the secret police. But, unlike

Mindszenty, he had no peace or strength or certainty. His
reconciliation with God, he knew, was just a tar paper shack, ready
to be blown to bits while his cries went unheard on the wind.
He closed his eyes and prayed for help.
“From the look on your face I’m guessing you don’t like to travel.”
Major Brillam was standing over him.
“Sir?”
“You haven’t gotten your orders yet?”
“No.”
“Your unit’s headed to France. I’m going to miss you, son.”

CHAPTER THIRTY-TWO

December 16, 1955
“I therefore announce my candidacy for the Democratic presidential
nomination,” declared Senator Estes Kefauver. “I intend to conduct a
vigorous campaign. As in 1952, I will enter a number of state
primaries. I am a firm believer…”
Here in the second row of a chilly ballroom at the Willard, the
Star’s Cecil Holland leaned over to pick up the trademark coonskin
cap that had landed beside him when Senator Kefauver tossed it, for
the photographers, into a nonexistent ring.
“If you’re so cold,” whispered Holland to Mary McGrory, “why don’t
you make use of this?”
“It’s not even twenty degrees outside,” she answered softly, while
assessing the fur cap’s possibilities as a muff. “It would be rather
pretty without the tail.”
“The tail is all Kefauver’s going to be,” declared Joe Alsop, to
Holland’s right. “They’ll waste him as the VP candidate on another
losing run by Stevenson.”
“You think so?” whispered a man from the Baltimore Sun. “He just
said he wouldn’t take the second spot.”
“He’ll take it,” said Alsop, perfectly certain. “From what I hear,
Stevenson’s heart is in worse shape than Ike’s. If Adlai gets an
electoral miracle, he won’t get an actuarial one, too. He’ll drop dead
during his first year in office. That’s the way Estes will be thinking
come the convention. He’ll take it.”

A young woman from the Scripps-Howard papers, appalled by
such ghoulishness, shot Alsop a glance. For good measure she paid
Kefauver a compliment, telling the reporter on her left: “Pretty
shrewd of him to get in on the Davy Crockett craze.” She pointed to
the coonskin on Miss McGrory’s lap.
Alsop groaned. “Oh, God,” he complained to Holland. “Poor little
nitwit.”
Holland laughed, knowing as well as Alsop that the cap derived
not from Davy Crockett but one of Kefauver’s early campaigns,
during which an opposing political boss mocked him as a “pet coon.”
At the lectern, the senator was now citing assurances he’d gotten
from Harry Truman himself that the former president wouldn’t block
his nomination in favor of Stevenson’s, as he’d done in ’52.
Kenneth Woodforde turned around to the third row and whispered
to Tommy McIntyre, one of the dozen or so Hill staffers mixed in with
the press this morning: “Stevenson doesn’t need Truman now that
he’s got God.” The Illinois governor’s recent move from the Unitarian
to the Presbyterian Church did look calculated enough to make even
the girl from Scripps-Howard roll her eyes once it was mentioned.
“He’s come to understand,” Woodforde explained to Tommy, “that
the deity really is the insurance salesman down the street, not that
cosmic To Whom It May Concern.”
Miss McGrory, in a voice even softer than Woodforde’s whisper,
defended Stevenson. “He’s still a Unitarian. There’s no UU church
near his farm in Libertyville, so he’s making do with the
Presbyterians.”
“Careful, Mary,” said Cecil Holland. “I’ll have to take back
Kefauver’s coonskin if you’re still so madly for Adlai.”

“Kefauver himself is a little like God,” announced Alsop, in his
most mandarin way, not bothering to whisper at all. “He spends more
time hearing the afflicted than in giving them relief.” He referred to all
the committee investigations the Tennesseean had held since
coming to the Senate in ’49—hearings on organized crime, steel
prices, juvenile delinquency, boxing. Most of them had produced
more television coverage than legislation.
Right now Kefauver was answering a question about which
primaries he’d be entering; it was followed by another about what the
polls were showing. He could not, of course, comment on the most
important sounding of all, which would take place tomorrow at
Eisenhower’s Gettysburg farm, when Dr. Paul Dudley White put his
stethoscope on the president’s chest. If all was in order, the eminent
cardiologist had promised, Ike could make his own decision about
whether to run for a second term.
Bored with Kefauver’s optimism, Tommy spit into a paper cup and
wondered if there was a bar open anywhere in the Willard at tenthirty a.m. He tapped Woodforde on the shoulder and asked, “Why
are you wasting your time with this? You ought to go up to New York
and find Welker. Write a few hundred words about the egg running
off his face.”
Woodforde laughed. The Idaho reactionary and his wife, about to
embark on a Caribbean cruise out of New York, had the other night
been sitting in their cabin when a surprise party of revelers burst in
with platters of caviar, a giant floral wreath, jeroboams of champagne
—and two flashing cameras. The bon voyage bounty had all come
from the hard-left longshoremen’s union, whose leaders thought they
could embarrass the senator with all the gun-crazy McCarthyites
who kept voting for him out there in the Wild West.
Tommy handed Woodforde a press release he’d gotten from
Welker’s office this morning decrying the “obvious attempt to get

even with the Senator for his outspoken criticism of communism and
his personal fight against the Commies.”
Woodforde smothered some laughter over the last mimeographed
word, too childishly crude for even McCarthy to use. He whispered to
Tommy, “It’s usually about now that Welker starts hinting he’s up
against the fags to boot. But I’m not sure that’s going to work with
Tough Tony Anastasia.”
Cecil Holland leaned across Miss McGrory’s coonskin muff to
remind Woodforde that the stevedores’ union was pretty full of
Communists.
“Yeah,” said Tommy, “ones with TVs and houses in Levittown.” Not
his kind of Communists, not the ones from twenty years ago, the
ones like Annie Larchwood’s husband.
Miss McGrory shooshed the males around her, and then declared:
“At least Kefauver is more or less self-made.” A stenciled biography
reminded the reporters here that he’d worked his way through law
school waiting tables.
Ignoring Miss McGrory—the sort of genteel liberal that wearied
him—Woodforde turned back once more to the combustible
McIntyre. “So this defector coming home: are Potter’s constituents
complaining they’ll be contaminated by having him in their midst?”
After several years in China, Richard Tenneson, a Korea POW
who’d gone over to the enemy, was today returning to his family’s
farm—but in Minnesota, not Michigan, Tommy corrected. “They can
complain to Humphrey,” he told Woodforde.
“This guy’s not exactly one of the all-American stoics Potter had
before his committee. Even now he’s not fully contrite.”
“No,” said Tommy. “If this kid had testified, Charlie would have
pitched such a fit his canes would’ve shorted out.”

“And Potter’s apoplectic moments are pretty few and far between.
Wouldn’t you say so?”
“Charlie doesn’t have many moments one could even call
conscious,” said Tommy, spitting again into his cup. “And I don’t have
to tell you that that’s off the fucking record.”
Undeterred, Woodforde got to his real question: “Then what
accounted for his apoplexy, or at least high dudgeon, a year and a
half ago? At the end of the army nonsense.”
The memory forced Tommy’s yellow teeth into a big smile: “You
mean his burst of moral fervor?”
“Yeah,” said Woodforde, trying to make his insistence appear
casual. When Tommy said nothing more, he tried another tack. “Who
else knows anything about it? Besides you, that is.”
Tommy’s grin retracted itself into a wary pout. “Oh, it’s a very small
circle. Like the number of Kefauver’s advisers with any sense.”
“Would it include my old acquaintance Private Laughlin?”
Tommy wheezed, phlegmily, while rising from his chair. “I think I’m
allergic to that goddamned coonskin.”

“Étaient-ils Résistants?” Tim asked. He pointed to the knot of men
cheering on the National Assembly candidate who’d just cited his
wartime service from the steps of the Rheims city hall.
The man standing next to Tim answered in English, and with
knowing laughter. “Oh, we were all resisters. Every one of us!”
With no translation for the meaning to get lost in, the remark’s tone
seemed to contain equal measures of sardonic pleasure and shame.

Tim decided not to press the matter, settling for self-mockery about
his bad French. “Un américain évident, oui?” he asked, pointing to
himself.
“Yep,” said the Frenchman, sounding the syllable like a movie
cowboy. He stubbed out his Gitane, shook Tim’s hand, and obeyed a
summons from his wife, who had just emerged from the bakery. The
pair walked away from the mairie, indifferent to the rest of the
political speech.
They were an exception. Tim and two guys from the radio unit who
had passes today had been told not to wear their uniforms, since all
varieties of French political passion seemed to be rising with the
approach of the January 2 elections. Coming into town, Tim had had
no need to consult Jerry Baumeister’s old pocket dictionary, which
he’d been sent over with by Mary, to grasp the pro-Communist
slogans and À BAS USA he’d seen festooning the walls and alleys.
There were so many signs for so many candidates that you half
expected the plaster baby in the city’s Christmas crèche to be
holding one, too.
The cathedral was Tim’s destination this afternoon, but he found it
hard not to get caught up in the auditory duel that was starting
between the orating candidate—now blaming Prime Minister Faure
for the loss at Dien Bien Phu—and an opposing claque that shouted,
over and over, “Salaud!” Tim could hear Gallic echoes of “Who lost
China?” in the exchange, and for a moment he imagined himself
back in the Senate Caucus Room a year and a half ago. The
dangerous memories surrounding that time at last propelled him
toward the cathedral and onto his knees, beneath the haloed carving
of an unknown saint.
Some nearby votive candles looked like the pipes of an organ in
flames, and the church’s chalk walls, wrested over centuries, block
by block, from plains all over Champagne, bore not only the marks of
the First World War’s bombardments but also scars from the French

Revolution. Tim reckoned that he had been repairing his own shelter
for nearly a year, starting over whenever some gust, like the news of
Hawk’s engagement, knocked it down. There were times when he
was beginning to believe he’d built himself a snug little chapel, but
there were still those other nights when it would be blown away in an
instant, and he would have to dig himself a foxhole with a few
desperate prayers, hoping to stay hidden from harm until morning.
Earlier today, at the café near the mairie, he’d had a ham
sandwich and some pâté de grives, a regional specialty that the
waiter eventually confessed was made from the thrushes one saw
fluttering in and out of the local bushes. Tim had eaten what he could
of it while reading the Herald-Tribune’s article about a Budapest AP
correspondent named Marton who with his wife had just been
arrested and tried as a spy. Their fate? Unknown. Tim imagined
them in a cell down the hall from Cardinal Mindszenty.
These stories of freedom’s instant and complete disappearance
had an ever-tighter hold on his thoughts. He’d lately been making
himself read a book called Religion and the Modern State by an
Englishman named Dawson. He’d acquired it on his one trip to Paris,
when he’d gone looking for mystery novels in an English-language
bookshop, and he was carrying it with him even today. Its thesis—
that all the kingdoms of state would disappear, become useless, “as
soon as the light comes”—had made him understand more exactly
the nature of his patriotism. The intense attachment he felt to his
own country—the world’s bulwark against totalitarianism—derived
from America’s permitting him to go about his real business in the
world, which was the search for a revelation so great, for a peace so
absolute and ecstatic, that he would in time be lifted away from the
world entirely. His own country, his own state, allowed this quest; the
opposing state didn’t. And yet, if his life and everyone else’s
managed to fulfill itself, then even America would subside into
irrelevance. Right now one had to protect it from its enemies, but
finally it would drop away like the first stage of a rocket that took one
to a thoroughly different universe.

He had tried, clumsily, to explain all this in a letter to Kenneth
Woodforde, who had replied with a telegram that the mail-room
officer handed over with raised eyebrows: CONGRATULATIONS,
LAUGHLIN, ON BECOMING A MARXIST—STOP—YOURS UNTIL THE
STATE WITHERS AWAY, KW.

He had taken to praying with a fervor beyond anything he’d
previously achieved in his life, and to fasting as well, at least
occasionally—not for any penitential credit the effort might provide,
but for the lightheadedness it brought on, the physical floating he
could feel after about thirty-six hours. Longer than that, he’d joked to
Woodforde, and he couldn’t do his job for the benevolent, temporary
nation-state.
And yet maybe these moments of exultation were no more than
spiritual dizziness, and he himself was just a “dizzy dame,” what
Hawkins used to call the nightclub-obsessed boyfriend of some older
man he knew. He would never be a systematic thinker or half as
quick as Woodforde. In fact, along with the Dawson book he had
purchased a copy of T. S. Eliot’s essays—partly to further his
religious way through this dangerous, secular world, but also, he
knew, because when he saw the spine he had been seared by a
memory of Hawk standing naked in the dark, purring the lyrics of one
of his Eartha Kitt records:

T. S. Eliot writes books for me;
Sherman Billingsley even cooks for me;
Monotonous…

The bus back to Verdun left at three-forty, and when it pulled out
from the center of Rheims, Tim found himself sitting amidst several

men and women in their sixties, American husbands bringing their
wives back to the war they had fought four decades before. Verdun
itself was a kind of giant tomb for the month-after-month slaughter of
1916, though that battle held none of these men’s particular
memories. They had arrived with the rest of the Americans the
following year, for the last of the blood and derangement, which still
on occasion exploded from the region’s landscape, when some
farmer’s tractor disturbed a shell that had been slumbering for forty
summers.
This was the kind of story Tim wrote up for The Com Z Cadence,
the official newspaper of the army’s Second LOC, or Line of
Communication, a significant stretch of the Americans’ everburgeoning Cold War home away from home. Running from Verdun
to Orléans to La Rochelle, the Second LOC had been established as
a backstop, in the event the First LOC, strung through Germany, got
overrun by the Russians. The Yanks may have come late to Verdun
back in ’17, but this time they’d come to town early, manning the
7,965th Area Command in advance of the next war.
The Com Z Cadence—the Last Voice You’ll Hear, as the staff liked
to joke—specialized in morale-building local color and human
interest. In the last couple of weeks Tim had done stories on the
flower sellers outside the U.S. cemetery at Varennes, and the neveridle two-thousand-foot runway at Saran. His biggest accomplishment
had been a story he’d freelanced to Stars and Stripes itself about the
engineering depot at Toul, where Caesar’s legions had once camped
and where their American successors, after spending a first winter in
tents, had by now built a whole town of warehouses, barracks, and
chapels. They’d even fielded a baseball team called the Toul-Nancy
Dodgers.
The bus let the tourists off in town and continued to the base,
whose horseshoe-shaped welcome arch reminded him of the neon
sign greeting tourists to Reno, as he’d seen it years ago on a
postcard sent by Uncle Frank. Inside the caserne, Tim shared a

large room, down the hall from the First Signal Group’s
cryptographers, with seven other guys. The barracks dated from just
after the Franco-Prussian War—a war he’d barely heard of—and
some recruits said you could still smell the stables that had once
been on the ground floor. Tim’s own floor, the third, was served by a
single shower, which provided a measure of hygiene hilarity for
letters to Francy and Tom, communications that he kept
immaculately free of the politics and religion he sent to Mary and to
Woodforde.
“Un visiteur—pour vous!” said the local woman who manned the
message desk.
Tim cocked his head in disbelief.
“Oui!” she insisted, pointing to the little excuse for a lounge down
the hall and to the right. “He is here on, how do Americans say, his
honeymoon?”
For one moment, his heart pounding, he thought it might be Hawk:
to be married on Saturday, December third. It was the sort of thing
he would do, a show of the brazen insouciance he couldn’t live
without displaying. But then he realized it had to be Jerry
Baumeister, who must have made his mariage blanc to Beverly
Phillips and come here on a side trip from Paris to show her another
portion of the culture behind his now useless master’s degree.
Once inside the lounge, Tim saw that he was wrong in this guess,
too.
“Paul!” he exclaimed.
The “brewer”—he could hear Hawkins saying it—extended his
hand.
“Private Laughlin.”

“Where’s Mrs. Hildebrand? Congratulations. I just heard.”
“Thanks,” said Paul, who went on to explain that his wife, Marjorie,
until recently his brother’s bookkeeper, was resting in town at the
Hôtel Bellevue on the Avenue de Douaumont, which neither of them
could really pronounce. They’d been married last Saturday, the
tenth, and had come over to Paris on TWA. Even though it was a
honeymoon, Marjorie wanted to see the patch of ground in Ardennes
where her brother had been killed late in ’44, as well as the “Red
Schoolhouse” over in Rheims, where the Germans had surrendered
to the Allies. When they were through with this historical circuit, they
would start making their way to London.
Tim told them he could get information from FAFLO, the FrenchAmerican Fiscal Liaison Office—“we’ve got initials for everything”—
about discounts for a Europabus they could take from Paris to
Calais.
Paul nodded thanks.
“She never told me you were getting married,” said Tim, lowering
his voice and somehow unable to say “Mary,” as if the new Marjorie
Hildebrand might actually be here instead of at the hotel.
“She asked me to check up on you,” explained Paul. “Make sure
you were okay.”
“I write to her more than to my sister!” Tim said, with an overhearty
laugh. “She knows I’m fine.”
“She says you don’t talk about much except God and the
Communists.”
Tim hoped his hand was covering the title of Dawson’s book. He
continued speaking through simulated laughter: “She doesn’t tell me
much, either. Like about your getting married, for instance!”

Hildebrand wondered what she did and didn’t tell this kid, whom
he liked well enough despite his condition, which he probably
couldn’t help and might still be young enough to grow out of. Had
she confided her sputtering affair with the Estonian—as she’d
confided it to him? He doubted it, since in his own case Mary had
almost made a present of the story, an intimate parting gift on the
eve of his marriage.
“Did she tell you,” asked Paul, “that her friend Beverly has left the
office?”
“Really?”
“Yeah, just a couple of weeks ago. She’s joined the staff of some
Illinois congressman. She made a connection with his office when
she did that charity show on the Hill. Mary says she never liked
working for State after they fired her friend Jerry.”
“I came over here with some of his French books.”
Paul nodded. “Are you allowed to show me around?”
“Sure,” said Tim, pointing the way forward. They walked back
toward the message center, but after several steps, more to test
himself than anything else, he stopped and asked: “Did Mary go to
Fuller’s wedding? On the third?”
“Yes,” said Paul, reluctantly. “In fact, I was her date.” A part of him
wanted to rest his hand on the kid’s shoulder, but too much else in
him was repelled by the possbility as soon as it came to his mind.
“That crazy woman, the one who used to be in her office, showed up
at the back of the church.”
“Oh, her,” said Tim, laughing.

Nine hours earlier Fuller had been traveling from Union Station to the
I Street apartment in a cab that got trapped in traffic around Dupont
Circle. A colored man had just leapt to his death from the top of the
Connecticut Avenue underpass.
“They want to kill me! They want to kill me!” the man had shouted
to the policemen urging him toward safety. The remark had been
passed down two long lines of idling vehicles by a morbid pedestrian
walking the sliver of space between them.
“And I suspects he’s right,” Fuller’s driver, also colored, had
whispered, sadly and to no one, while his passenger thrummed his
fingers on a beribboned package containing a silver bowl.
Married thirteen days ago, Fuller and Lucy had gone for their
honeymoon to Acapulco, a destination that made his aunt Valerie
sniff with surprise that her nephew’s old-money bride should be
aping the flashy Catholic Kennedys. As it turned out, the wedding trip
had been cut short several days ago by the death of Uncle Ned,
whose funeral in New York Fuller was returning from today. Lucy
would stay on there for one more night, then go up to Massachusetts
for a few items she wished to bring with her to their new home.
He, in the meantime, would take possession of the little brick
house, attached on one side, over in the Parkfairfax section of
Alexandria. The development had sprung up quickly during the war,
but was leafy and handsome by now, a half-time home to many
younger congressmen, and, these days, if Fuller wasn’t mistaken, to
Citizen Canes himself. His own possessions from I Street would go
over tomorrow in a truck driven by the built Italian boy who
sometimes did yard work for Andy Sorrell, and who, Andy assured
him, could be had.
Lucy had been highly presentable at the funeral, never overdoing
a gesture. She’d had a veil on her hat, but a small one, and it had
been pulled back, off her face. She’d looked appropriately grave

without shedding tears. And yet, while the money on both sides of
her family was older and ampler than what had ever been on either
side of Fuller’s—and although the art-historian father had put a thick
patina of culture onto the Boardmans—there was something of the
arriviste about her. She betrayed a strong, potentially useful
insecurity that made her seem almost a shopgirl who felt she had to
keep earning her splendid new husband. With the actual shopgirls of
the world, her manners and aspect of entitlement carried the full
birthright of arrogance, but in all that concerned Fuller she displayed
an undisguisable nervousness. Unchecked, this might grow toward
panic and make her demanding, but properly managed, it should
keep her nicely off balance, Fuller reasoned, just the way she’d been
in the three days between his application for the marriage license
(easily revokable) and the actual wedding, which had been carried
out down here, quite modestly, at St. Margaret’s Episcopal.
The phone had been ringing when he came into the apartment this
afternoon: Lucy, half-teasing and half-nagging about his having
neglected to get it turned off. He made a note to do so as she went
on to explain how she wanted them to go hear the Yale Glee Club in
Lisner Auditorium on Monday night. Her father had been a member
“eons ago,” and the concert could be her and Fuller’s first trip into
town together from Parkfairfax, assuming he didn’t himself want to
arrive at the auditorium directly from the office.
To all of which he had responded, without audible irony, “Yes,
dear.”
His reasons for marrying had proved stronger than ever at Ned’s
funeral, held inside St. James’ Episcopal on Madison Avenue, a hell
of a lot fancier than St. Margaret’s on Connecticut. Fuller’s least
favorite sister had been wearing a big turquoise amulet, as if it were
the latchkey to Ned’s New Mexico house. His father, now judged to
have lost much of his sense ahead of his money, was mostly
shunned by his own partners. And his mother, looking neither
particularly resentful nor present, had worn a gold Catholic crucifix

with a chunky graven image of Christ’s cadaver attached to it, the
whole thing more vulgar and a lot more expensive than his sister’s
necklace. Both his parents were under sixty and already doddering.
Aunt Valerie, buzzing with vitality and animus, could be seen turning
into some baleful family retainer out of Balzac, wondering what she
was to do with these ancien régime characters she’d been saddled
with.
A good thing old man Boardman had paid for the little wedding
down here in D.C. In fact, at the subsequent funeral Fuller had found
himself guessing that the new in-law might quietly be kicking in to
help out with Uncle Ned’s departure, Ned having been pretty badly
depleted at the close. As Fuller had listened to the tiny boys’ choir,
which he’d sung in himself twenty years before, he’d wondered if
either of his parents had even remembered to make the customary
donation for the little angels’ high-pitched services. Probably Mother
had, unless she’d recently spent that pittance, too, on Irish priests
bringing the Word to South American Indians.
Now, as he poured himself a drink, the late news was murmuring
out of the television, which Lucy, on her one inspection of his
“bachelor apartment” had suggested might not be large enough for
the place in Alexandria. Maybe he’d just give it away to the Italian
boy tomorrow morning. In any case, its swan song here, now coming
through the mesh, would be these dronings by Kefauver about the
important work he’d done investigating juvenile delinquency.
That’s me. I’m your hoodlum, your little j.d.
Fuller looked at the kitchen chair, surprised to remember the
ardent kisses of a particular morning, and the way Skippy hadn’t
been able to unzip either of their pants fast enough. All in all, a much
more bravura display than what he could expect from the one in the
bedroom now, this sweatered college kid he’d met ice-skating on the
C&O canal a couple of hours ago. He already couldn’t remember the
name, only that he’d been calling him Dicky, for Dick Button, under

the small bit of available moonlight. His own name would remain a
convenient secret, since he’d removed the strip of paper from the
doorbell down on the first floor—the one bit of packing he’d
accomplished so far.
“Be right in,” Fuller called out to Dicky, who was lying on the bed,
still in his sweater, as patient for his unwrapping as Lucy had been
on the wedding night at the Hay-Adams.
He looked again at the kitchen chair, remembering the morning
he’d been strapped to McLeod’s magic, inquisitorial machine;
remembering, again, the hour before that, here.
Have you ever considered yourself to be in love with another
male?

CHAPTER THIRTY-THREE

May 24, 1956
“Welcome to the 7,965th, sir.”
Major Conroy, the public-affairs officer, shook Senator Potter’s
hand and escorted him to the small dais that had been set up at the
front of the enlisted-men’s club. “I know you’re already acquainted
with this fellow.”
“Hello, son,” said Potter, shaking Tim’s hand. “Good to see you in
uniform.”
Tim thought Potter didn’t look entirely certain about whom he was
greeting. More than a year had passed, after all, since his departure
from the office. But there was no time for more than a handshake.
He’d been assigned to write about this quick visit from several
members of the Armed Services Committee, who were over here
inspecting several American installations and were soon to leave for
the LOC’s headquarters in Orléans. Potter did not have a seat on
Armed Services, but as a war hero who’d escaped with his life from
this region, he had been invited to junket along by Scoop Jackson,
his old Democratic colleague on the McCarthy committee.
The other Democrat here was Mississippi’s John Stennis; Mrs.
Smith of Maine and Styles Bridges of New Hampshire made up the
Republican side of the delegation. “Stylish” Bridges, Hawk had
always called the latter, who looked a little like the actor Lyle Talbot.
Moving quickly to his seat, Tim didn’t shake hands with any senator
besides Potter, though he felt a slightly ridiculous desire to ask Mrs.
Smith if she knew what had become of Robert Jones since she’d
beaten him in the primary two years ago.

“We haven’t had this much excitement here,” announced Major
Conroy, “since Billy Graham dropped in last summer!” Amidst
general laughter he turned the proceedings over to Senator Stennis,
the senior majority member, who explained through his bad teeth
and impenetrable Southern accent that the group would be winding
up its fact-finding travels at the new NATO air-forces headquarters in
northern Italy.
“Unfortunately,” Mrs. Smith added, “Ambassador Clare Boothe
Luce won’t be there to greet us. She’s home in the States for a bit,
recovering nicely from a bout of illness. I was hoping for a bit of
female company, but it appears I’ll have to keep putting up with
these gentlemen instead.”
“Ah, Mrs. Luce,” whispered Kenneth Woodforde. “Mother Superior
as imagined by Harry Winston.”
Besides a man from the AP, who wore a button saying FREE THE
MARTONS, Woodforde appeared to be the only American covering
the delegation. Weeks ago he had sent a letter with the news that
he’d be traveling with the senators, and he had laughed when Tim
replied by asking if The Nation would be paying his way over. He
was here on some money advanced to him by Harper & Row, for
whom he was producing a book called Armed and Dangerous:
America’s Permanent War Footing, an exposé of defense-contractor
gluttons and their legislative ladles in both houses of Congress. It
would be as strident, he promised, as the publisher would permit.
Picking up on Major Conroy’s Billy Graham remark, Senator
Jackson told the recruits who’d been mustered to attend the event:
“We hope that during your period of service over here you have
absolutely no excitement whatsoever. We just want you to do your
jobs in peace and then to come home in one piece.”
Amidst the applause and whooping, Woodforde asked Tim: “So
what were you doing when they dragged you over to this show?

Peeling potatoes?”
“Wrapping up a Princess Grace souvenir wedding plate to send to
my mother.”
“I hear the heir she produces will look a lot like William Holden.”
“Do you have a question?” Senator Jackson inquired, testily,
pointing to Woodforde.
“Yes, I do. Why, when the United States professes to support the
United Nations as a freewheeling arena for the airing of differences,
have your senatorial colleagues on the Internal Security Committee
been calling for the expulsion of the Soviet delegate, Arkady
Sobolev?”
Jackson replied with the kind of scorn Tim remembered him
displaying once or twice in the Caucus Room. “Mr. Sobolev
understands a little about expulsion himself. As you know perfectly
well, five young Soviet sailors recently defected and were given
asylum while they were in New York City. And not long after that
some of Sobolev’s muscle men managed to hustle them onto a
plane out of New York and back to Moscow. Anyone want to take
bets on whether they’re still alive? You’re confusing a diplomat with a
thug, Mr. Woodforde.”
Woodforde maintained a smirk as he wrote down Jackson’s
response.
Senator Bridges, a natural grandstander, decided to lighten the
moment with a little pandering. He pointed to the sign at the back of
the enlisted-men’s club and began reciting its injunction: “‘In the eyes
of foreign people, you are a mirror reflecting everything the United
States looks like and stands for. By your appearance and actions, so
is your country judged.’ Good advice. But I’ve got only one question
for the men: How are they feeding you?”

During the derisive roar that followed, Woodforde spoke loudly into
Tim’s ear: “Christ, he might as well be Bob Hope with the golf club.
I’m half expecting Virginia Mayo to come out.”
When the ruckus died down, the AP man asked the senators
where Estes Kefauver, a member of the committee, was today.
Mrs. Smith replied that she “shouldn’t speak for the majority” but
“could only imagine he’s campaigning in Florida.” Stennis, who
wished no success for Kefauver, a desegregationist from the
neighboring state of Tennessee, pursed his lips. While this went on,
Tim regarded Potter, the only one who’d said nothing so far—as
mute as he’d typically been on the McCarthy committee. He looked
absent, even lost. Perhaps his mind was back in ’45 now that he’d
returned to France, but still, unless a roaring automotive economy
carried him over the finish line in Michigan, he looked like a bad
prospect for reelection two years from now.
“You have a pass at twenty-one hundred hours,” Woodforde told
Tim.
“I do?”
“Yes, the public-affairs officer seems to believe that even The
Nation’s man can be brought around by a full display of cooperation.
Everything’s supposed to be at my disposal until tomorrow morning.
Including the correspondent of The Com Z Cadence.”
“You’re not following them to Orléans this afternoon?”
“I’ll catch up with the marionettes in Italy.”
“Okay,” said Tim, tentatively. “I’m just a little worried about time.”
He was on deadline, he explained, with another story—about the
Spiritualaires, a singing quintet of Negro servicemen.

“You’ve got time,” Woodforde assured him. “And I’ll bring you up to
date on things back home. Your old boss, McIntyre, has all kinds of
interesting matters to impart. About some of your old friends.” He
looked at Tim, waiting for the last remark to register. “So where do I
come by for you?”
Sure enough, when nine p.m. arrived, it became clear that Major
Conroy had permitted Woodforde into even the caserne. Arriving
punctually to take Tim out for a beer, the writer rolled his eyes while
pointing to copies of National Review and Encounter that lay atop
Tim’s footlocker.
Tim explained that the first was part of a subscription his father
had gotten him, and the second a single issue he’d picked up at the
English-language bookshop in Paris.
“We know,” Woodforde explained, “that National Review is made
possible by the family money of a crazy individual. It’ll be a while
before we learn where Encounter’s money comes from, but when we
do you’ll realize it’s as much an organ of the United States
government as The Com Z Cadence.”
“Are you ready for a drink?” Tim asked, giving him a serene smile.
The two of them walked back to the enlisted-men’s club where the
Senate delegation had been presented this morning. The makeshift
dais was gone, and a handful of GIs were hoisting Cokes and beers.
“I’ll bet most of them spend a year in France without ever drinking a
glass of wine,” Woodforde observed.
“Why didn’t you bring your girlfriend over? What painter could
resist Paris?”
“No American with the least bit of talent has gone to Paris to paint
in twenty years. They go to your hometown, New York City, Corporal
Laughlin.”

To someone whose idea of the artist’s life remained easels and
berets near the Moulin Rouge, this was a revelation like one of
Hawk’s old life lessons, those ex cathedra pronouncements meant to
complete what the two of them jokingly used to call his “education.”
“So,” said Woodforde, sitting down at one of the oilcloth-covered
tables, “how are the Negroes?”
“You mean the Spiritualaires?” asked Tim, brightening.
“Yes. God’s Mills Brothers.”
“They’re terrific. They may even make a record.” He started to sing
“Swing Low, Sweet Chariot” in the lowest register he could manage.
“I’m sure you’ll write them up as proud Americans happy to be
serving in our color-blind army.”
Tim downed half his beer and felt merrily combative. “You know,
they get an English translation of Pravda at the HQ in Orléans, and it
sometimes makes its way up here. The last copy I saw had a story
on some Young Communist League members who want to be sent
to Siberia. To help ‘build the nation.’”
Woodforde pointed to the sign Senator Bridges had hammily
quoted this morning: You are a mirror reflecting everything the
United States looks like and stands for. By your appearance and
actions, so is your country judged. “You think what your clean-living
minstrels are experiencing is really so different from a little forced
labor?”
“They’re not minstrels, and of course it is.”
Woodforde smiled with indulgent superiority.
“Are you a Communist?” Tim asked, sincerely. “Or just an antianticommunist? I’ve always wanted to know.”

“Communism hasn’t arrived,” Woodforde explained, as if it were a
genre of painting that hadn’t yet made it to New York. “When it gets
here, it’ll be something quite different from Stalin, though its
opponents will keep waving that bloody shirt forever.”
Tim could see that Woodforde had been rattled, if not quite toppled
over, by press reports of Khrushchev’s big “secret speech,” in which
the current dictator had apparently laid out the crimes of the former
one to their full, breathtaking extent. Even so, the chasm between
the writer and himself was still too wide to keep shouting across, so
Tim narrowed the divide to the spectator sport of domestic politics,
mentioning a wire-service story he’d seen about a televised debate
between Stevenson and Kefauver.
“Two wet firecrackers,” declared Woodforde. “Amusing, though, to
see the great liberal Stevenson allowing the voters of Florida to
believe that, race-wise, Kefauver might as well be Paul Robeson.
Wait until Kefauver’s people start spreading the story of the ‘pansy
party’ Adlai’s supposed to have attended over here in Paris not long
ago.”
“Is that true?”
“Does it matter? Besides, when it’s all over, Joe Alsop will have
been proved right. Kefauver will take the number-two spot. And then
they’ll both lose together.”
Tim got a mental picture of the columnist ogling Hawk at the
Metropolitan Club’s coat check—I could tell you what I’ve got on Joe
Alsop—a picture first imparted on the awful night, a month or so
before the hearings began, when Hawk had come to the Capitol Hill
apartment. Maybe the two of us can become the three of us.
“I have a friend,” said Tim, “who calls Alsop Walter Liplock.” He
knew he was quoting this only for the chance to hear Hawk’s voice in
his head.

“Would this friend be your friend Fuller?”
“You know Fuller?” asked Tim, trying to sound casual.
“I’ve met him once or twice. Most of what I know about him comes
from your other friend, McIntyre.”
Tim rolled a peanut between his fingers.
“Which reminds me,” said Woodforde, reaching into his pocket for
a note penciled in what Tim recognized as Tommy McIntyre’s hand:
You should write to your friend. 3423 Mt. Eagle Place, Alexandria.
He misses you.
Tim’s eyes welled with longing and rage. He knew that Tommy
was sending this not because of the extreme romantic nature they
supposedly shared—I told you because you’ll understand—but for
the cruel pleasure of control, even more satisfying when exercised
across a vast distance.
“He’s special to you, isn’t he?” asked Woodforde.
Did the soothing manner of this leading question approximate a
defense attorney’s direct examination of his client? Or, Tim
wondered, did it mirror the sympathy of the police detective putting
queries to a distraught victim? No, he decided: it was the tone of a
reporter trying to get a story.
“Why are you spending all this time with McIntyre?” he at last
responded. “Have you developed a sudden interest in Potter’s
position on overfishing the sea lamprey? Maybe you’re writing the
senator’s biography? Legless and Dangerous: The Citizen Canes
Story.”
“Easy, Laughlin,” cautioned Woodforde, still soothing, but hardly in
retreat. “I go to Potter’s office to see McIntyre himself. He knows a
lot, shall we say, though he does like to tantalize as much as to tell.”

He looked straight at Tim. “I don’t care about you and Fuller. That’s
your business.”
“What’s your business?”
“I want to know why Potter did what he did a year and a half ago,
at the end of the hearings.”
“Oh, please,” said Tim, tossing the peanut to the floor. “No one
cares anymore about those procedural votes.”
Woodforde replied in a good imitation of Tommy’s Irish voice: “You
boys all think you’re so clever. So worldly wise, believin’ Cohn had
somethin’ on McCarthy. You never ask yourselves if Schine had
somethin’ on Joe.”
At this remove Tim had to ask himself if he could even remember
who had had what on whom. He had tried for a year and a half to
wipe from his mind the sordid revelations Tommy McIntyre had
cackled into the phone line between D.C. and Madison Square
Garden: how the drunk McCarthy had been tempted with Potter’s
bastard son. Boys, girls, your old-maid auntie. When he’s hammered
he’ll grope anything. How the photo of McCarthy succumbing had
wound up in the hands of David Schine instead of Tommy. And how
it had brought McCarthy low nonetheless. Dave let Joe know he had
it, and from that moment on, if Royboy insisted Dave get an ice
cream sundae every morning at reveille, Joe was ready to initial the
request.
Tim finished his beer as Woodforde opened a second one for him,
which he began drinking fast, remembering how Hawk used to say
that “by the third one you could get Skippy to vote for Norman
Thomas.” And that was without thirty-plus hours of fasting, which,
except for a glass of milk, he’d undergone since yesterday afternoon.
He’d go until midnight tonight, when he’d take a vision-seeking walk
around the base perimeter.

Lightheaded, he looked at Tommy’s note—a whisper from Iago.
He hated him, he decided, just as he hated being here in the army
as the only way to escape his love for Hawk. He decided he would
hate Woodforde, too.
“So that’s all you know?” he finally asked the writer.
“Does any of it involve Fuller?” Woodforde persisted.
Relishing a sense of power, the feeling that at last he had
something to give or withhold, Tim answered: “See if you can find an
eighteen-year-old punk named Michael Larchwood in Cheboygan,
Michigan.”
Woodforde wrote down the name.
“See if you’re smart enough to find out what his real last name is,
or ought to be.”
“Why don’t you tell it to me?”
“I’ve got to go,” said Tim, getting up, none too steadily, and starting
for the door. “I’m craving the opium of the people.”

“So,” asked Fuller, “was this de Staël a White Russian with a Blue
Period or a Blue Russian with a White Period?”
Mary pulled from her purse a Phillips Collection brochure about
Nicolas de Staël, the exiled Russian painter who had last year
committed suicide in Paris. She offered the gallery’s booklet as
proof, answering the real question on Fuller’s mind, which was
whether she’d in fact had a lunchtime tryst with “the Estonian.”
“I’m disappointed,” said Fuller.

“Are you living vicariously through me these days?”
He laughed and disappeared into his office, but both of them knew
there was an element of truth in what she was suggesting. Since his
wedding, his hours at the department had become more regular, and
his phone rang far less often with calls from young men not doing
government business.
A new boss had also affected his routine and behavior. Mr. Morton
had left at the end of February to run for the Senate from Kentucky,
and he’d been replaced by Robert C. Hill, a serious New Englander,
not yet forty, who probably wouldn’t be around for long. Mr. Hill had
already had the ambassadorships to Costa Rica and El Salvador
and was said to be after the big prize in his region of expertise, the
embassy in Mexico City. In the meantime, he was proving a tougher
nut than his predecessor. Apropos of Sobolev and the sailors who’d
defected, he was asking hard, almost Nixonian questions of the
department’s UN liaisons, but he had also been pushing back
against the department’s Senate critics, telling them they were illinformed whenever that was the case, as it frequently was.
Hill and Fuller were not each other’s cup of tea, but the acquisition
of a wife had made the latter even more socially deployable than
he’d been before. On Sunday afternoon, Fuller had glamorously
represented the bureau at the Afghans’ independence-week party
over on Wyoming Avenue, where the top-drawer little crowd had
included Justice Douglas and Senator Saltonstall, whom everyone at
State was aware of as a distant relative of Fuller’s bride.
Putting away the museum brochure, Mary opened an envelope
sent over by Congressman Yates’s office: from Beverly, it turned out,
a sketch of the wedding dress—a sly, knee-length knockoff of Grace
Kelly’s—in which she would be married next month.
Mary had begun to think of herself—without much regret, she tried
to believe—as an old maid, even if her affair continued with

intermittent ardor. Fred would never offer to leave his wife, and she
would never ask him to. She would never have his undivided
attention, and he could no longer have hers when he talked of the
latest atrocity or opportunity for Estonia, as he did on the phone
several times a week.
Indeed, here he was now:
“Hello, baby.”
“Hello, Fred.”
“I’d love to see you Monday, but I’ll be picketing you instead.”
She had heard about the anti-Sobolev demonstration being
planned for the sidewalks outside the department. “Maybe we could
manage a quick kiss behind the police van?” she offered.
“Maybe.”
“Fred, I was joking.”
“Oh,” he said. “You know, there is a way we can combine the two
activities, baby.”
“Really? Tell me.”
“Late September, outside the General Assembly in New York. All
the exile groups are getting together for something pretty gigantic.
On a weekend. I can book us into the San Carlos Hotel; it’ll feel like
a honeymoon.”
Or a farewell, she thought.
“That didn’t come out right,” he apologized. “I just meant we’d be
in a different place altogether, not your city, not mine.”

She tried to imagine herself shopping for shoes on Madison
Avenue while Fred carried a placard through Turtle Bay. Maybe she
would feel like a wife who’d accompanied her husband to a
convention of druggists or petroleum engineers.
“I’ll take you to My Fair Lady,” he added.
“Estonia will be free before you can get tickets. But I accept the
invitation to New York.”
She could not shake the feeling that this proposed weekend, still
months away, would be the end of it. But she would rather they had
their goodbye scene there than here, so she wouldn’t keep running
into the memory.
A moment after the two of them hung up, a delivery boy from the
cleaners on Virginia Avenue entered the office. Through the
cellophane bag she could see it was a tuxedo he was carrying.
“Mr. Fuller?” he asked, looking at the ticket.
Mary pointed to the right doorway, but having heard his name,
Fuller was already emerging. He paid for the garment and asked the
boy to hang it in his office.
“And where are you off to tonight?” asked Mary.
“White House Correspondents’ dinner. At the table of a UPI man,
whom I’ll no doubt convince we’ve handled Sobolev and the sailors
exactly right. Let me show you what you’ll be missing.” He opened
Mary’s Washington Post to a photo of Patti Page and Jimmy Cagney,
the evening’s entertainment, rehearsing at the Sheraton Park.
“Well, aren’t you a Yankee Doodle Dandy.”
Fuller pointed to Patti Page. “That doggie in the window was her
reflection.”

Mary laughed hard, even while wondering whether this wasn’t a
line he’d heard from the comic piano player at the Chicken Hut, one
of the bars Jerry Baumeister unblushingly mentioned from time to
time, the way a regular man about to forsake bachelorhood might
bring up bygone nights with his buddies at the corner gin mill.
As Fuller read her the story about the evening’s dinner, she
realized why she detested Lucy. It was because she herself believed
in nature, in Fuller’s fulfilling what she now accepted as his own. She
also had begun to feel, perhaps contradictorily, that Jerry and
Beverly were fulfilling some aspect of their natures; marriage for
them would be the cementing of something childlike and fraternal
and curiously authentic. But Fuller’s union with Lucy was no civilized
companionship, or even some piece of sophisticated realism; it was
a corrupt bargain that the two of them had struck. Fuller thought he
was on top of it, but Lucy’s needle was in him deeper than McLeod’s
had ever been.
“Is Lucy coming here before the dinner?”
“No.”
“What about the tuxedo?”
“That’s for Monday night. Something with the Joint Chiefs. Tonight
is business suits, but I will be heading back to home and hearth
between here and the Sheraton Park.”
“Well, the sight of you and Lucy getting ready for a party must look
like a ‘Diamond Is Forever’ ad.” She was being very polite.
“Actually, we’ll be undressing. I’ve committed to making a baby,
and the calendar has been calibrated like an atomic clock. The
fertility gods are supposed to be in full cry between now and seven.”
He checked his watch. “I’ll be leaving early.”
“Would you like a boy or a girl?”

“I’d like a reprieve.”
He could see a look on her face that said tell me: tell me that you
know it’s a mistake; tell me why you really did this; and tell me
whether you aren’t really going off to meet a boy instead. But Fuller
was thinking that the only mistake he’d made had been with the
Italian boy. As Andy Sorrell had predicted, Tony Bianco could be had
—but, as it turned out, only inconveniently. The kid had been back to
Alexandria twice, without an invitation, the first time parking a block
away, waiting for Fuller to pass by so that he could ask him for the
price of a new set of tires. The second time he’d reappeared by mail,
requesting help for his mother’s operation—for which Mrs. Hawkins
Fuller charitably let her husband write a check on the joint account
while she suppressed her common sense and they both silently
hoped this would be the last such communication.
No, this was not the big feared slip-up that had motivated him into
marriage, but it was a slip-up nonetheless, and from it Lucy had
tacitly extracted the agreement to make a baby, another tie that
would bind, and earlier than he’d expected.

CHAPTER THIRTY-FOUR

October 31–November 7, 1956
“Major Conroy’s looking for you.”
“Let him look,” said Tim, shooting Private Meyers a joyful look. He
was hunched over one of the radios, picking up English-language
transmissions out of Hungary. For the past week, these broadcasts
had been more thrilling than any long-ago episode of Inner Sanctum.
His mind and spirit had been sparking and overloading, as if the
radio console were the source of his own electricity. It was now 9:30
a.m., and he’d been helping the operators with transcription since
five o’clock.
Beginning Sunday, after fruitlessly gunning down hundreds of
Hungarians who’d risen up in revolt, the Russians had been slowly
withdrawing to their bases all over the country. Soviet tanks still sat
in front of the parliament building in Budapest, but according to
Radio Free Kossuth, a new Hungarian flag—red and white and
green—was flying from the dome. The country’s Olympic team, on
its way to Melbourne, had already redesigned their uniforms.
Major Conroy entered the radio room. “You’re still at it,” he told
Tim, his tone somewhere between indulgence and exasperation.
“Who could leave?” was Tim’s exuberant reply.
In spite of himself, Conroy came closer to the radio and listened,
while Private Meyers handed Tim a piece of transcript someone had
made off a station transmitting in French from one of the southern
provinces: during the night Soviet troops had sent a confusing signal
by making some circular movements between Záhony and
Nyíregyháza. But the new premier, Imre Nagy, whom the Soviets

had been forced to accept last week, was declaring that everything
remained on track. In fact, Hungary would even be leaving the
Warsaw Pact!
Major Conroy begged to remind everyone that at this very minute
the British and French were bombing Egypt in order to maintain
control of the Suez Canal. “Don’t lose your heads.” No one had even
mentioned the presidential election, six days away.
“O ye of little faith!” declared Tim, reaching for a piece of transcript
he’d made while the sun was still coming up: “‘After two years of
enforced silence, in the last few revolutionary days, we have formed
the first Christian organization, the Christian Youth League. We have
to contend with indescribable difficulties and therefore we ask you,
our sister organizations abroad, to come to our assistance morally
and materially.’ Major, you can send a check, or a parcel, to number
6, V. Nagy Sandor Street in Budapest.”
“Laughlin, you have an assignment today for the Cadence.”
“Yes, covering trick-or-treating by dependents under twelve at the
Toul base. Major, come on!”
“We drive down there in half an hour. Not one minute beyond that.”
Tim shrugged with a kind of joyful hopelessness. He was not going
to let anything put a crimp in the moment of deliverance.
“Half an hour,” repeated Major Conroy, as he exited.
About twenty minutes later, Private Meyers came over and tapped
Tim on the shoulder: “I think you’ll want to see this.”
It was something copied off Radio Free Kossuth: “Cardinal József
Mindszenty, Prince Primate, was liberated on Tuesday by our
victorious revolution and arrived at his residence in Buda at 0755 this
morning. Because the road seemed unsafe, the Primate was brought

to Budapest in an armored car guarded by four tanks. In all the
villages they passed, the people threw flowers to the Primate and the
soldiers. The cardinal told the correspondent of Magyar Honvéd: ‘I
want to be better informed of the situation before I do or say more.’”
Meyers caught Tim murmuring, prayerfully.
“I guess this is a big deal for you, huh?” He shrugged. “What do I
know? I’m just a Jew from Secaucus.”
Tim felt a moment’s shame: How did one put a single man’s
suffering against the extermination of the Jews? But the thought, he
reasoned, was an absurdity. One put Mindszenty’s persecution with
the Jews’ sufferings, just as one day the as-yet-untallied dead within
the Soviet Union would be added to the century’s mass grave.
Nazism and communism were the same thing; every man in the
street knew it. The difference between them was a semantical matter
for the fancier poli-sci professors at Fordham.
“Corporal Laughlin,” called Major Conroy. “Now.”
“Yes, sir,” said Tim, double-timing it to the jeep. He carried the
Mindszenty transcript like a relic.
Half a mile into their trip to Toul, he tried speaking his mind to the
major: “Eisenhower’s offering ten million dollars in aid to the new
government. That’s pretty paltry, don’t you think?”
“No politics, corporal.”
“Okay. I promise to concentrate on finding vivid descriptive terms
for all the Davy Crockett and Princess Summerfallwinterspring
costumes I’ll be seeing.”
He closed his eyes as the jeep drove over the chalk plains still
soaked with blood and salted with the bone fragments of two world
wars. They continued on past the living, the wars’ survivors who

were now oxidizing toward normal deaths and perhaps salvation. He
believed that he was being carried at last toward transcendence and
freedom, toward a solution.
“You’re muttering, Laughlin. Speak up.”
“Sir. Gloria Patri et Filio et Spiritui Sancto, sicut erat in principio—”
Major Conroy shook his head. “At ease, Corporal.”
“Amen, sir.”

“Tranquillity is just around the corner.”
Fuller waited for her to respond and after a moment gave up.
“You’re not laughing.”
“I get it, I get it,” said Mary. The reference was to Undersecretary
of State Herbert Hoover, Jr., now acting chief of the department while
the aging John Foster Dulles underwent an emergency
appendectomy at Walter Reed. Dulles had collapsed at home early
this morning, a day after returning from New York, where he’d
convinced the United Nations to adopt a resolution calling for the end
of hostilities in the Middle East. With Hungary still unsettled and the
election now only three days away, Mr. Hoover wanted all hands on
deck, with no excuses made about its being a Saturday.
The president’s own calming statement about Suez—conceding
that the British, French, and Israelis had made an “error” in attacking
Egypt—seemed to be helping him at home, if not abroad. The
Democratic ticket appeared to be sinking fast, swamped not only by
the electorate’s instinctive rallying toward the incumbent during a
crisis, but also by the Soviet premier’s kiss-of-death endorsement of
Stevenson’s desire to stop testing the hydrogen bomb. By now Ike
had not only Hoover’s son in his corner but one of FDR’s, too: the

youngest Roosevelt, John, had come out for him. And Joe McCarthy,
rising from alcoholic slumber, had announced that he would seek his
old committee chairmanship if the Republicans took Congress next
week along with the White House.
In truth, there wasn’t much to be done here in the bureau this
afternoon. Most congressmen were out of town campaigning for their
seats, and the amalgam of tension and idleness was working on
Mary’s nerves. As soon as she heard Fuller getting off the phone
with the secretary’s people upstairs, she went into his office.
“Any more news from the doctors?”
“Yes,” he replied. “They told us yesterday afternoon that ‘we’re’
pregnant. What started them using that pronoun? Dr. Spock?”
Mary looked at his blotter for a moment—it held the latest poll
numbers on whether the U.S. should get out of the UN—before
leaning down to kiss him on the cheek.
“Congratulations. To you and Lucy. How far along is she?”
“Two months. Maybe two and a half. And a nervous wreck. The
doctor recommends she take up smoking.”
“What are you going to do for nerves, Papa?”
Fuller sighed. “Maybe I’ll give it up.” He looked through the
doorway. “Is Hill still around?”
“Yes. You’re going to have to hang on a little longer.” She made
herself smile as she walked off.
They’d not had much to say to each other these past few months,
though the silence between them had itself been like a conversation,
an ongoing mutual acknowledgment that she knew—up to a point—
what things were like for him now, even if he was still determined to

see them through. In public, he and Lucy remained on their shiny
trajectory, attending the shah’s birthday bash at the Mayflower on the
same day last week that Mary had been added to a group of
wholesome-looking State employees chosen to accompany a Soviet
delegation on a tour of Ike’s and Stevenson’s respective campaign
headquarters. The Russian from the Academy of Sciences had
complained about the Washington humidity and explained that
having only one name on the ballot in Soviet elections was not a
problem: “You can strike it out and write in another.” He allowed that
this didn’t happen often.
Mary looked up at the sweeping second hand on the clock and felt
nearly as exasperated as Fuller to be here. Suez did, after all,
appear to be in the hands of the UN, and the Soviets did appear to
be continuing their withdrawal from Hungary, despite a few confusing
signs: troops and tanks were staying close to the airfields, but only, it
was said, to shield the Soviet dependents being evacuated from
Budapest.
The phone rang, promising a bit of relief from the tedium. She
wouldn’t care if it were only some eager-beaver young GOP
congressman, out on the hustings, asking for the exact answer to
give about the Middle East.
“Baby.”
It was the first she’d heard from him since they’d broken things off
up in New York—so amicably that, several minutes afterward, they
weren’t sure they’d really done it.
“Hi, Fred.”
“I knew you’d be in.”
She could hear the excitement. He sounded like a college student
who’d been up on No-Doz for a week.

“I hate to disappoint you, Fred, but from what I heard a half hour
ago, Mr. Dulles is likely to be fine. And even if he doesn’t make it,
Herbert Hoover, Jr., is not exactly Nixon.”
Fred didn’t seem to remember their small adventure on the night
of Ike’s heart attack.
“Are you voting for him?” Mary continued. “For Ike, I mean.”
“Yes, while respectfully holding my nose.”
“Beverly’s taking me to the Statler on Tuesday, with the Bethesda
Stevenson Club.”
“You’re going to have an early night.”
“I could use one.”
“How come?”
“No particular reason,” she replied.
“So are we still good-enough friends that you’ll call me with the
least little thing you hear about the Baltics?”
“It amazes me that you believe somebody is going to come down
the hall to tell me anything other than that the new file boxes I’ve
ordered have come in.”
Fred scoffed at her modesty. “There’s a lot to be said for being
near the action. Keep listening: your Mr. Hill might come down with a
case of loose lips.”
“Fred, what exactly do you expect to happen in Estonia?”
“Wildfire, Mary. Think about the way it spreads. Why did the
Hungarians rise up? Because five days before they did they heard
about some Poles in Wroclaw dragging the Soviet flag through the

gutter. Eisenhower should stop trying to calm things down. He
should be fanning the flames.”
“I’ll tell that to the next Young Republican who calls.”
“Get ready for a new birth of freedom,” said Fred, more sonorously
than usual.
“Fred, I need to go. Fuller wants something,” she fibbed.
She hung up the phone and put some lotion on her hands. Two
months. Maybe two and a half. Counting on her moistened fingers,
she calculated that Lucy’s baby would probably come in late May,
only a bit earlier than her own.

IKE IN LANDSLIDE; DEMS HOLD CONGRESS

At the LOC’s Orléans headquarters, Tim worked at fleshing out the
Cadence’s election edition. Even bannered as such, it would
maintain the paper’s resolutely light touch and confine the political
story to the front page’s left side. The three right-hand columns were
being held for “7,965th Chefs Get Tips from Paris’ Best.” News from
Hungary would go on page two.
“Can you stand some more?” asked Lieutenant Dillenberger, who
had noticed Tim’s grief-stricken demeanor when he’d arrived here
yesterday afternoon from Verdun.
“Sure. I like pain.”
Everything in the stack of dispatches and transcript was awful, as
it had been for the last three days, ever since the Soviets began
using bombers and tanks to crush the uprising. The rebels were now
mere resisters, trying to hold on with Molotov cocktails and paving
stones. Refugees were crossing the border into Austria, some of

them carrying pots of Hungarian soil. A Soviet puppet named Kadar
had replaced Nagy, and Sobolev, the Russians’ UN delegate, was
saying that the U.S.S.R. would just ignore any resolutions on
Hungary the General Assembly might finally decide to pass.
Meanwhile, Premier Bulganin had made the novel suggestion that
the U.S. and Soviet Union intervene together in the Middle East—
against the British and the French.
And here was the latest from Radio Budapest, which had resumed
toeing the Soviet line: “In these difficult hours let us remember the
great Socialist revolution of October 1917. Now, in the light of the
open excesses of the counterrevolutionaries, the tremendous
significance of October 1917 becomes even clearer to us. The
Soviet peoples have set the world an example.”
“Anything from Radio Free Rakoczi?” asked Tim, without much
hope.
Lieutenant Dillenberger sifted the most recent pile of transcript and
handed Tim an appeal from the holdout station: “We are fighting
against overwhelming odds! This is our message for President
Eisenhower: if during his new presidency, he stands by the
oppressed and those who are fighting for freedom, he shall be
blessed….”
“At least we know where we are,” said Dillenberger. “A couple of
reports say some of the Russian recruits think they’re in Berlin and
World War Two’s still going on. Christ, they must be dumber than the
guys we get from Oklahoma.”
Tim continued reading transcript and wire-service copy, which now
included the news that Mindszenty had gone to seek shelter at the
American embassy in Budapest. At three p.m. Major Conroy came in
to get him. The two of them were due to ride back to Verdun
together. With a small movement of his head, the officer ordered
Dillenberger out of the room.

“Get a grip, Corporal Laughlin.”
“Yes, sir,” said Tim, who only now realized he had tears on his
face.
Major Conroy put a hand on his shoulder. “I am not General
Patton. I am not about to smack you and say ‘Snap out of it.’ But
snap out of it.”
Tim saluted, went off to wash his face, and five minutes later
rejoined Conroy near the line of jeeps outside. It turned out—a small
mercy—that they would be returning to the base in an American
sedan, with the major allowing him to ride alone in the backseat. All
the way to Verdun, Conroy kept up with conversation offered by the
driver, a Pfc and rabid Red Sox fan; it was almost suppertime when
they arrived back on the grounds of the 7,965th.
As Tim started for the office, the major had one last message for
him: “You’d better eat your damn dinner, too. I don’t know what that’s
about, but if I see you settling for a glass of milk again, I’ll report
you.”
“Yes, sir.”
He went straight to his desk, piled with the Herald-Tribune and the
London papers, all of them full of Ike’s victory. Beneath them lay a
letter from Kenneth Woodforde, who must have used one of his
congressional connections to get it into the air pouch. It was dated
Monday afternoon, when the Soviet attack had been in full force:
Dear Laughlin,
I found Michael Larchwood (in jail for grand theft auto, by the
way), and I now have a pretty good idea of what went on back in
’53 and ’54. But given what’s now going on, I’ve lost interest in
my little historical exposé.

I never answered your question about what I was, Communist
or anti-anti-Communist. Maybe I’m going to be the first anti-antianti-Communist. After the last two days I realize that the C’s in
power are about as likely to change as your One True Church.
I’ve lost my appetite in more ways than one.
So I thought I’d let you know that your indiscretion about
young Larchwood is safe with me. Fact is, I couldn’t prove
anything without the photo Schine’s supposed to have, but (see
above) another fact is I don’t have the stomach now to pursue it.
One other thing: Fuller and his wife are expecting a child next
year. I tell you this only so that you don’t hear it from McIntyre,
who I suspect would derive some odd pleasure in imparting the
news. I apologize for playing that card when I saw you back in
May.
Woodforde
P.S. Do remember that this failed uprising was meant to be, in
its own way, a socialist revolution. They wanted to be neutral,
not “just like us.”
Tim got up and headed to the mail room, where the Frenchwoman
was getting ready to go off duty. He asked if he could still send a
telegram, to 3423 Mt. Eagle Place, Alexandria, Virginia, U.S.A.

7965TH AREA COMMAND—07 NOV 56

HAWK—

RUSZKIK HAZA!

WHEN YOU GO TO THE DEPARTMENT TOMORROW—PLEASE—IN
WHATEVER WAY YOU CAN—DO SOMETHING.

T.

The Frenchwoman asked if she correctly understood the spelling
of the exclamation. “And it means what?”
“Russians go home. My two words of Hungarian.”
She nodded, and made a last quick scan of the yellow piece of
paper on which he’d composed the message.
“C’est tout?” she asked. “Nothing to add?”
His stomach dropped; he felt himself struggle to keep from
inserting the three words he’d nearly written with the pencil: I love
you.
“Non,” he said. “Nothing to add.”

PART FOUR

DECEMBER 1956–MAY 1957
How should we like it were stars to burn
With a passion for us we could not return?
If equal affection cannot be,
Let the more loving one be me.
—W. H. AUDEN,
“THE MORE LOVING ONE” (1957)

CHAPTER THIRTY-FIVE

December 1–3, 1956
Leaves were burning along three stretches of curb on Martha Custis
Drive. Raking his front yard, Fuller glanced down the adjacent street,
somehow half expecting to see Tony Bianco in his parked car. But
months had passed with no sign of the part-time moving man. Fuller
was free to concentrate on the smoky aroma riding the breeze. It
might be December, but the crisp air and sky belonged to the
October Saturdays he remembered from St. Paul’s. This was New
England weather, held up at the Mason-Dixon Line for a month and a
half.
The Army–Navy Game, near the end of its second quarter in
Philadelphia, was playing on his new English portable radio, an
anniversary present from Lucy. Knowing he’d be working outdoors
this afternoon, she had decided that her husband should have the
expensive gift, smart and snug in its leather case, two days early. It
sat on the front steps of the house, and its reception was excellent.
Lucy now waved to Fuller from the open upstairs window. Still in
her quilted yellow peignoir with its little bow at the neck, she had her
sketch pad balanced on the sill. She was drawing with the expensive
pens Fuller had gotten her from Fahrney’s and handed over this
morning after she made her own premature gift. To show that she
was indeed using them to create her tight, folksy drawings—what
Grandma Moses might have produced with ink instead of oils—she
raised one of the pens for her husband to see. Her other hand held a
filter-tipped Salem, the brand that was helping to soothe her through
a fourth month of pregnancy. She had still hardly begun to show, not
even when she wore something besides this billowing nightgown.

Fuller had begun sweating through his flannel shirt. He waved
back to his wife and then walked around to the side of the house to
get at whatever leaves might be resting under the carriage of their
new Plymouth. The car reminded him that he could, if he felt the
inclination, make a quick run before dinner to the keypunch operator
(dumb as a post, and with that little mustache) in the rented room off
Chinatown. Or even a quick stop at Andy Sorrell’s place just over the
bridge.
The radio announcer, vamping through halftime, genially
mentioned that Ike had violated the customary presidential neutrality
toward today’s game by telegraphing his good wishes to the Army
coach. The station then cut to a Red Cross appeal for donations to
ease the plight of those Hungarian refugees now reaching freedom’s
shores.
PLEASE—IN WHATEVER WAY YOU CAN—DO SOMETHING.

He had done nothing about Hungary, unless you counted
pocketing a phone number from the good-looking Budapest
university student who’d recently been paraded through the bureau
like some kind of war trophy. Everyone else was doing something
about Hungary; the department had been consumed by the refugee
operation. An eleventh planeload of exiles had arrived the other day
at Camp Kilmer up in Jersey, and before the cloyingly named
Operation Mercy was finished at least twenty thousand more would
be allowed in, thanks to some fancy interpretive footwork with the
immigration laws.
But a hundred thousand were still in camps along the Austrian
border. Nixon would be heading over to visit them in a week, and
after that, Congress would start hearings on the conduct of U.S.
policy (had there been one?) during the uprising. Fuller imagined
that at least one of his CIA buddies would have hell to pay for the
general failure to anticipate rebellion along the Danube.

RUSZKIK HAZA!

He was glad he had been the one—not Lucy—to open the door
when the telegram arrived. What exactly, he’d wondered, did Skippy
want done? Air strikes? Maybe just an airlift for all the priests the
embassy in Budapest couldn’t hold? He’d also wondered why this
frantic little cry—he could almost feel it being whispered into his ear,
between ardent kisses of his neck—was coming only now. It could
hardly have to do with just Hungary. Whatever it meant, it felt
helpless, like the furtive leafleting said to be going on even now in
the streets of Budapest.
Fuller lit a match and watched the leaves catch fire. He had no
compelling desire this afternoon for the keypunch operator, let alone
Andy Sorrell. He felt himself, unexpectedly, wanting someone and
something else. The radio, filling up the rest of halftime, had begun
to play some old Tommy Dorsey songs, Dorsey having choked to
death on a forkful of food earlier in the week.

I’m getting sentimental over you.
Things you say and do…

He looked over his shoulder and back toward the house. On the
breeze, smoke from Lucy’s cigarette joined the smoke from the
leaves.

It would be Monday before he actually wrote the letter, and only after
he got Mary to answer an important question.

“So,” Fuller asked, tapping her on the shoulder, “how much
longer?”
Irritated, she swiveled around in her typist’s chair: “How much
longer until what?”
She didn’t look well. Her face was puffy, and while it might be le
dernier cri, the sack dress she was wearing did nothing for her but
hide her figure.
“How much longer until Skippy gets home?”
She had long since stopped leaving Tim’s letters on her desk. In
fact, the last time Fuller had spoken of him was nearly a year and a
half ago, at the time of the engagement. Make it easy on him.
“He’s due back after the first of the year,” she answered. “With
plenty of reserve duty left to perform, since it was only a two-year
enlistment.”
“Will he be performing in New York or down here?”
“Down here.”
She saw pleasure in his expression. Was it a surge of sentiment?
Or appreciation of his power in having created this geographic
anomaly—causing Tim to enlist in New York, but as a Washingtonian
who even now would be returning to the District?
“I’m guessing,” Fuller said, “that you know what he wants to do
once he’s back. Rejoin Citizen Canes’ listing ship?”
“He doesn’t write me that often, Fuller. Not as much as he used
to.”
Fuller kept looking at her, no matter how unnerved and jumpy she
appeared, no matter how preoccupied—the way she so often was

these days. He knew that she knew.
“He wants to do something with the refugees,” she explained. “He
doesn’t know exactly what. He takes the whole Hungarian business
personally somehow. I don’t understand why.”
Why is what she wanted to know from Fuller: Why now? Why the
rekindling of interest in him? But she didn’t ask; she just broke away,
relieved to greet the girl bringing Mr. Dulles’s autopen downstairs to
the bureau.
It was the secretary’s first day back in the office after a long
recuperation in Key West: last month’s emergency surgery had
revealed a cancerous growth on his intestine. Today Mr. Hill had
prepared a letter that would go out to every congressman and all
ninety-six senators, in which Mr. Dulles cheerfully announced his
own return, thanked the lawmakers for their good wishes, and said
how pleased he was once more to be standing with them, shoulder
to shoulder, on the brink, against the Soviets.
Fuller helped Mary to set the writing machine on a countertop near
her desk.
“I hate that dress,” he said.
“So do I.” She’d copied the Dior pattern from one of the French
magazines Jerry bought for his new wife. “It’s an ‘H-line.’”
“It looks like an oil drum.”
“Thanks.”
“I’m trying to compliment you. Don’t hide your light under a bushel.
Or inside a sack.”
She tested the autopen on a blank sheet of paper and felt glad to
see Fuller disappear into his office. She was furious with herself for

having let the weekend come and go without deciding what she
would do. There was still not much to hide under the Dior, but in
another month that wouldn’t be the case.
There was a place way down on F Street where she could be rid
of the baby for a hundred and twenty-five dollars and be back here
the next day. She’d gotten the address and the price, just like the
magazine with the Dior, from Beverly, who had heard of it from a girl
in Senator Douglas’s office who’d been knocked up by the man who
each year wrote most of the air force budget.
Or she could go back to Louisiana and become the oldest resident
of the Ursuline Sisters’ home for unwed mothers. True, she already
had a high school diploma, but maybe she could at last master
algebra from one of the visiting tutors. More plausibly, she’d been
considering a small, discreet establishment in the Garden District,
run by a wealthy Catholic woman, where older young ladies tucked
themselves away during their last few months and then swiftly
surrendered their babies to an orphanage—had them whisked away
in a warming pan like the bastards and pretenders of historical
legend. All this would shield her father’s eyes from the
embarrassment, but she couldn’t shield Daddy from the whole truth.
She was determined to tell it to him, unless it finally involved F
Street.
And if she chose adoption? What afterward? Perhaps she’d go
teach English at Beauregard Junior High, disappearing in plain sight
for the rest of her days.
She fed the letters into the machine—Mr. Hubert B. Scudder, 1st
district, California; Mr. Clair Engle, 2nd district, California; Mr. John
E. Moss, Jr., 3rd district—and all at once knew that she had to get
out of the office, immediately, without even telling Fuller. She put a
note on the receptionist’s desk, saying she felt sick.

“Good!” Fuller told the girl several minutes later, once she
conveyed the news. “Maybe Miss Johnson will come back in one of
her old New Look skirts.”
He returned to the two documents he’d been composing—a halffinished thank-you letter to Congressman Fulton of Pennsylvania,
who had taken it upon himself to defend Eisenhower’s Hungarian
actions as the only prudent course, and a letter to what Fuller
guessed was the administration’s leading critic among corporals of
the 7,965th Area Command:
They’ll be processing them at Camp Kilmer (I think that I shall
never see…) until May. The Austrian desk, which really was just a
desk until a month ago, is now two large rooms more tightly stuffed
than Fibber McGee’s closet….
Letting Skippy know that he remembered his chatter about the
radio: a more shameless seduction than the one he’d carried out
some weeks ago on a Catholic University junior.
There’s all sorts of interviewing, plus clerical and “liaison” work
going on in half a dozen buildings around town. If you want to do
something like that, it should be easy enough for me to set it up.
You said please do something. Well, I am—I’m passing the buck
to you.
He sealed the letter, still surprised at the ripple of unease he’d
experienced writing it—an unstable mixture of desire and hesitation,
with even a sense of personal fault blended in. He couldn’t quite
credit the last, since the exact nature of his desire was once more to
grant the protectiveness that came with ravishment, something he’d
not done, or felt himself doing, since the departure of Cpl. Timothy P.
Laughlin, to whom he now addressed the envelope, the ink of his
fountain pen bleeding through to the onionskin inside.

Protection: what Skippy craved; what one paid and loved the
gangster for.
Fuller put this last thought to the side of his mind, like a
department memo stamped FFA, For Future Analysis. He rose from
his desk and breezed past the receptionist. “Going to mail a letter,”
he explained, as if there weren’t two Outgoing trays less than three
feet away.
He exited on Twenty-first Street, thinking of how the building would
before long extend itself all the way to Twenty-third. Next month, if
their aging hearts and bowels held out, Ike and Dulles would stand
here in their homburgs slathering mortar onto the cornerstone of the
addition. Fuller was pleased to anticipate the building as a labyrinth
twice its already huge size. It was even now, he decided, big enough
for Timothy to stay discreetly lost in, though it still might be
preferable to have him beavering away in one of the department’s
satellite offices somewhere else in the city.
Fuller walked down H Street toward the Potomac, past the
university’s buildings and the boys in their letter jackets. Maybe he’d
keep going all the way to the river, or drop into the Foggy Bottom
Wax Museum and stand with the handful of visitors fitting themselves
into the goofball tableau of the St. Valentine’s Day Massacre.
Valentine’s Day: Lucy, he now recalled, wanted to go to Bermuda
for it. He slid this thought, too, to the edge of his mental blotter, as
the university’s terrain gave way to Foggy Bottom’s crumbling little
brick houses, toy cottages attached to one another for dear life. The
Negroes had made this shaky spot their own for decades, until the
whites started coming back when the department relocated itself to
the neighborhood after the war. What the bulldozers hadn’t gotten
was now falling into the hands of renovators. Eleanor Dulles, the
secretary’s sister, had herself bought and fixed up one little row of
the miniature dwellings; she’d made them what the real estate ads

called “darling,” and sold one or two to the sort of boys in the
department who had something to fear from Scott McLeod.
Yes, the mephitic old neighborhood, having sagged for a century
with its poor drainage, ammonia factory, and tinderbox warehouses,
was slowly recuperating toward a placid modernity. Where the
gasworks had stood when Fuller first arrived at State, foundations
were now being laid for the kind of white-brick apartment building
that back home was turning stretches of Park Avenue into sets of
high-rise dentures.
He reached the corner of Twenty-fifth and H, still not having put
the letter into a mailbox, when he spotted, lo and behold, the brewer,
poking around the weeds and tin cans in a yard belonging to a redbrick house, just as narrow as the others, but a little taller, with a
comical turret at the top.
Paul Hildebrand caught his eye and they waved to each other.
Mary’s old suitor stepped out of the yard and onto the broken
sidewalk, leaving his survey of the premises to the two employees
he had with him.
“Well,” said Fuller, looking up at the turret while he shook
Hildebrand’s hand, “this one is pretty baronial for the Bottom.”
“A regular Taj Mahal. I’m not sure what we’re going to do with it.”
Hildebrand pointed in the direction of his nearby small brewery,
visible from this corner, though dwarfed by the much larger Heurich’s
plant beside it. “We still own two or three of these little dumps,” he
explained, pointing to the row of houses running up Twenty-fifth.
“Heurich used to have most of them. They got built in the nineties,
mostly for the Germans and the Irish, who all took off once the
streetcar came in. No reason to actually live here when for a couple
of pennies a day they could get in and out to make their living
making beer. The colored have been in the houses ever since. This
one’s so far gone it’s been abandoned for a year. Our accountant

only realized the other day that the pittance of rent had stopped
coming in. We’re here trying to decide whether to fix it up or knock it
down.” He paused to take a look at some missing cornices. “I’m a
little taken aback. I didn’t realize I was a slumlord.”
Fuller watched one of the other men pulling at some branches to
see whether the window behind them was whole or broken.
“It’s a haunted house inside,” Hildebrand continued. “Cobwebs. A
couple of old couches, some busted cupboards with jelly-jar glasses.
Christ, a colored woman who passed by five minutes ago told me
there were still privies in the alley during the war. Mrs. Roosevelt
came poking around one day, shaking her head. How’s Mary?”
He seemed to hope the fast elision would keep Fuller from
realizing he’d mentioned her name.
“Not herself, I’d say,” Fuller answered. “This afternoon she lacked
the energy to stay on my back about something annoying I’d said.”
Hildebrand tested a piece of wrought-iron fence that looked as if it
might give way in his hand. “I wish she’d get out of there. Find
something that made her happier. How’s married life?” he asked,
hoping for a cordial, dishonest answer. He knew more than enough
of Fuller’s story from Mary.
“The berries. In fact, today’s my anniversary.”
“Already?”
“There’s a baby coming in May.”
“Congratulations.” Hildebrand smiled and extended his hand.
“And yourself?” asked Fuller. He couldn’t remember the name of
the girl the brewer had married.

“Things are fine. I wish business were a little better. No heir yet.”
“Well,” said Fuller, laughing gently, “I’ve been truant long enough.
I’d best be getting back to the office.”
Hildebrand shook his hand for a third time and prepared to resume
inspecting the house.
“So what do you think you’ll decide?” asked Fuller. “About this
place.”
“I think we’ll probably knock it down. But not until summertime at
the earliest. In this town it takes more permits to demolish something
than it does to build.”
“So you’ll just leave her locked up until then?”
Hildebrand laughed at the place’s worthlessness. “What lock?”

CHAPTER THIRTY-SIX

January 22, 1957
Tim thought Woodforde’s foot must have crunched another peanut
flashbulb—there were loads of them amidst the detritus of
yesterday’s inaugural parade—but a backward glance through the
fog on F Street left him uncertain.
“A Nixon poster,” Tim’s companion at last explained.
The winds were picking up, sharpening the contrast between this
morning’s weather and the sunny calm of yesterday afternoon, when
Tim had watched the parade from the corner of Thirteenth and
Pennsylvania. His vantage point, the pedestal of Pulaski’s statue,
had been so good he was able to pick out even the types of flowers
in the Nixon girls’ corsages.
Now, less than twenty-four hours later, as he and Woodforde
plodded eastward, it was hard to concentrate on anything but the
thick gray mist.
“Think of all those poor private planes,” said the writer, in mock
horror. “Unable to get back to Greenwich or River Oaks before
dinner.”
“I thought you’d converted,” said Tim. “At least sort of.”
“I am a man without an ideology. Which in our century is worse
than being a man without a country.” Woodforde had sat out the
inaugural parade at a one-o’clock showing of The Girl Can’t Help It.
“You need a church,” said Tim.

“You need an exorcism.”
In the aftermath of the Hungarian catastrophe, the two young men
had conducted a prolific and forgiving correspondence. A peculiar
understanding and sexless affection had grown up between them all
through November and December as their airmail envelopes
traveled back and forth over the Atlantic. Before Christmas came,
Woodforde was suggesting that Tim, once he got back stateside,
move into a portion of the big, shabby commercial loft where the
writer and his girlfriend were residing.
He’d been living there for two weeks. His drywalled-off room took
up only a small fraction of what felt like a spacious version of the
7,965th’s barracks. Five other painters besides Gloria Rostwald had
their own pieces of the vast premises one block from Woodward &
Lothrop’s. Not only was his landlord living in sin, Tim had written
Francy; he himself and all the rest were residing illegally, against the
District’s zoning regulations.
Each of the artists, Gloria had explained, worked with acrylic
paints on canvases that hadn’t been primed. They were trying to
constitute an innovative “color school,” acting as if Washington were
a creative destination on the order of New York or Paris (as that city
had once been, Tim was careful to remember). The group’s paintings
were pretty, but also gauzy and faint, he thought. Whenever he
looked at them, he wished they’d come into clearer focus, the way
he wished the city now would, as he and Woodforde continued
marching east.
The writer was on his way to the Hill, and Tim would accompany
him as far at Fifth Street, where he’d veer off to St. Mary of God, the
Hungarian church. He’d been working there on behalf of the
refugees now streaming into town, taking his meals in the rectory
basement and coming home with pin money for his efforts. He paid
his rent to Woodforde and Gloria with what he’d saved from his army
pay, which was most of it.

“Those poor Hungarian souls,” said Woodforde, looking down Fifth
Street toward Tim’s destination.
“You wouldn’t believe what some of them have been through.”
“Exactly. Ten days of Kate Smith records and apple pie at Camp
Kilmer. Makes you shudder.”
“See you later,” said Tim, clapping Woodforde’s shoulder and
dashing off into the fog, his heart almost light with purpose.
Since arriving back in the U.S., he had still not seen his family.
Francy and Tom were threatening to come down from Staten Island
if he didn’t get up to them soon, but the lack so far of any reunion
didn’t seem strange—not when he hadn’t seen Hawkins, either.
Why, he’d asked himself a hundred times, had he ever sent the
telegram? Had he succumbed to a simple moment of weakness
while he was angry at God over Hungary? Had a loss of faith in Him
prompted a return to that other object of worship, Hawk?
The letter of reply from Alexandria had arrived when he was
packing up his things inside the barracks. He had not responded to it
in turn, since, strictly speaking, he didn’t have to. I’m passing the
buck, Hawk had admitted, allowing any suggestion of a job to remain
nonspecific. Even so, Tim could now feel Hawk’s presence across
town, like the golden chalice behind the tabernacle’s curtain.
He had told himself—was telling himself even now—that he could
not go through all that again, not after having made himself right with
God, who was allowing him to feel useful in a small way with the
refugees. The country had already turned its attention away from the
exiles, but there had been no slackening of zeal inside the rectory at
St. Mary, Mother of God, where a few minutes after leaving
Woodforde Tim was busy with money orders, cans of cling peaches,
and pediatrican referrals.

It was the middle of the afternoon before Father Molnar’s secretary
came to tell him he had a visitor.
In a wrinkled suit and stained tie, Tommy McIntyre looked as if
he’d barely managed to pull himself together for someone’s funeral.
Tim wondered for a moment how he kept himself from being fired,
but of course there was no mystery to that: Tommy could still, at any
time, use his knowledge of Potter’s son against the senator. With the
approach of next year’s election, the boy’s existence would be an
even more potent fact than it had been in ’53. Michael Larchwood’s
being in jail was a bonus cartridge in Tommy’s ammunition belt.
“Sir,” said Tim.
“Sir,” replied Tommy, with the comic courtliness each had
sometimes displayed toward the other in better days.
Tim abruptly stumbled into sympathy: “I heard that Mrs.
Larchwood died. I should have written you.”
“Ah, yes,” said Tommy. “I suppose you heard all about it from the
left-wing scribe. He doesn’t come by much anymore.”
Tommy looked around at all the sorting and packing, seeming to
admire its efficiency, before he added: “I suppose he told you about
the scion.”
“He mentioned that he stole a car and went to jail.”
“Yes,” said Tommy, affecting a sentimental sigh. “Impetuous youth.
I had a visit from the lad shortly before his little scrape.”
“Woodforde didn’t tell me.”
“Woodforde didn’t know. Master Larchwood’s a somewhat rougher
character than the one we saw in ’53. A faintly threatening presence
this time ’round. It seems he labors under the delusion that those of

us in the employ of America’s lawmakers are rather wealthier than
we are. I disappointed him with the news that I had no more cash to
give him than I did three years ago, back at that excellent Schinefamily hotel.”
Tim knew that Tommy would any minute be bringing up Hawk,
seeking the peculiar pleasure of watching Timothy Laughlin squirm
at the suggestion that he and Tommy McIntyre had hopeless love in
common. To forestall this, he made a nervous joke: “Have you come
to offer a donation?”
“No,” said Tommy, straight-faced. “I’ve come on a mission of
mercy.”
He asked Tim to accompany him to the house of an old friend on
the Hill—a worse drunk than himself, he swore. “I’ve been
encouraging the fellow to quit. Friendly advice from the pot to the
kettle.” He paused for a second or two while Tim scrutinized his face.
“I did go myself, a couple of times, to the father confessor you
recommended at St. Pete’s, but it didn’t quite take. So I’m wondering
if you’d give the pitch to my pal. My own skepticism would be a little
too evident, I’m afraid, but he might be susceptible to an angel of
charity like yourself.” Tommy gestured toward the wooden crate that
Tim was packing with boxes of powdered milk and Nestlé’s Quik. “Or
at least to a more sober voice than my own,” the Irishman added.
Tim guessed that Tommy had found him through Miss Cook. He’d
called the old office last week in connection with paperwork that his
reserve unit required about his last salaried civilian employment.
Wary of both Tommy and the clock, he now looked up and saw that it
was only three, too soon to leave.
“They’re hardly in a position to dock you,” Tommy argued. “Why
don’t you take a stroll with me? The weather’s improved
considerably.”

Out on the street, walking toward the Hill, Tim felt his thoughts
turning to the possibility of reconciliation. Was what he’d
accomplished with Woodforde unthinkable with Tommy? Or even
Hawk? Of course he and Hawk had never really quarreled, but
maybe there was some subtle formula, like Father LeTour’s in New
Orleans, that would bring them back into a sort of relationship, some
platonic fealty he could practice without violating the worship of God.
Perhaps he could exist as a neutral state, like India, between two
great powers.
At number 335 on C Street, a vaguely familiar young man, on his
way out, opened the door. None of it added up. The house was not
the least disordered inside, and a female voice, in quiet conversation
with a man’s, could be heard coming from the second story.
“Heading back to the office,” the young man said to Tommy. “Go in
and sit down.”
“I don’t understand,” Tim said.
Tommy showed him a seat in the living room as if this were his
own house, and then nodded toward the staircase. A male figure
was descending, each step making several more inches of him
visible. A belly protruded, and the gait was less than steady. Finally,
the emerging head above its shoulders proved to be covered with
the mottled face of Joe McCarthy. The senator was combed and
freshly shaven, but for all that, like Tommy, barely pasted together.
The female upstairs, presumably Jeannie, could probably claim
credit for whatever physical cohesion he managed to display.
McCarthy came forward to shake Tommy’s hand. “McIntyre.”
“Senator, let me introduce you to another son of Ireland.”
“We met in your office, early in ’54,” said Tim.

McCarthy responded with a cry of comic agony: “Fifty-four!
Ohhhhh!”
Tommy and the senator warily entered into conversation about the
new Congress, whose alignments Tommy was demonstrably better
informed of than McCarthy. There was, Tim thought, an odd
cordiality between the two men, each of whom, he had to remind
himself, had something on the other and took him for an enemy.
Together here they seemed comrades: each of them pained and
defeated, both of them Irish and drunk.
McCarthy made a crack about Mrs. Luce’s final departure from the
embassy in Rome: “Now the only ring she’ll have to kiss is Harry’s.”
“If not the one he’s bought for his girlfriend” came Tommy’s fast
reply. Both men laughed and McCarthy got up to make drinks. Tim
said he’d have a Coca-Cola.
“So Alcorn’s now heading up the National Committee,” observed
Tommy.
“Fuck
Massachusetts,”
‘Eisenhower Republicans.’”
Even Tim knew
Massachusetts.

that

McCarthy
Alcorn

was

replied.
from

“Goddamned

Connecticut,

not

“Right you are, sir,” said Tommy. “One day a man will come from
out of the west and put an end to all this. Maybe Goldwater, maybe
somebody we don’t even know yet.”
McCarthy nodded at his own sagacity and finished pouring drinks.
Once they were distributed and he’d settled himself in a club chair,
he let Tommy take the conversation to its next topic: “Looks like my
man’s going to have a tough race next year. Against this fellow Hart.”

Unaware of Potter’s likely opponent, McCarthy asked: “Is he a
Jew? ‘Hart’ and ‘Harris’ and ‘Cooper’ always are.”
Tommy left McCarthy uninformed that Hart was a Catholic and the
lieutenant governor of Michigan, adding only: “At the very least he’s
going to scare the hell out of Charlie.”
“Good!” shouted McCarthy. “But that doesn’t take much, does it?”
He gulped his drink and warmed to the subject: “God, I’d love to see
him get his legless ass kicked out of Congress. At least he’s off the
committee.” He referred to the latter body as if it still belonged to
him.
Tim could see where this was going: Tommy had decided it was at
last time to bring down Senator Potter. His simmering rage over
Annie Larchwood’s death had blazed up into something like his old
fury toward McCarthy himself. This time he would reverse field and
make McCarthy the instrument of Potter’s undoing. Tommy would
alert the senator to the existence of the illegitimate son; then, rather
than tip the press himself, he would keep his part anonymous by
letting Joe spoon them the news. With a friendly wink he’d tell
McCarthy it was best to make reporters believe the story had come
from some loyal old gumshoe on the committee staff.
Tim also knew why Tommy wanted him here while McCarthy
learned the secret. His presence would provide the senator with a
kind of confirmation, since Timothy Laughlin’s face, never able to
mask anything, would testify to the story’s truth. And of course his
being here would also give Tommy the pleasure of seeing “young
Timothy” harrowed yet again.
Tommy watched in silence as McCarthy took a further few sips of
his drink. There was no danger the senator would ask why Tommy
wanted his boss undone. There was always a reason in the world of
who had what on whom, and it would be more convenient for

McCarthy not to know, for him just to marinate and savor the
suddenly fulfillable fantasy of seeing Potter get his comeuppance.
When Tommy spoke again, it was to tell McCarthy, casually, that
with a little help this fellow Hart might pull things off. But before
McCarthy could respond to the suggestion, the sharp cry of an infant
came from the second floor. “My baby!” yelled the senator, grinning
broadly before bounding upstairs to the child he and Jeannie had
just adopted from the New York Foundling Hospital. Cardinal
Spellman, who’d seen no need to ask too many questions about the
acquisition, had helped things along.
Tim decided that this was the moment to escape the house. But
McCarthy was almost immediately back in the living room, somehow
managing to keep a firm, tender grip on the blanketed baby. “Jeannie
says Princess Grace just had a girl of her own! The palace in Monte
Carlo put it out over the radio. Ain’t that swell? Well, that little girl
can’t be any prettier than this one!”
They might all be at some post-christening shindig inside
McConnell’s beer hall on Ninth Avenue. Tim wouldn’t be surprised if
he were asked to favor everyone with a song.
“Ain’t she grand?” asked McCarthy, looking more like the baby’s
uncle or grandfather as he thrust it into Tommy’s arms for closer
inspection. Overtaken by his own sentiments, Tommy appeared
unable to resume the mission that had brought him here, and in the
commotion of the baby’s transfer Tim at last managed to slip away.
He got as far as the vestibule before he felt McCarthy’s hand on
his shoulder.
It should have been frightening, but it wasn’t. McCarthy himself
looked innocently wounded, wanting to know what the hurry was.
“You do look familiar,” he said.

“We met just before the hearings, the day after Senator Potter got
a copy of ‘the Adams chronology.’”
“When Charlie was trying to get me to fire Roy!” McCarthy
laughed, as if remembering some comically bad season with the
company baseball team.
“Yes,” replied Tim, at a loss for more to say as he looked for
another escape route from Tommy’s vengeful world. He could feel
himself being lashed to it by the telephone line that had once
reached into Madison Square Garden. Boys, girls, your old-maid
auntie. When he’s hammered he’ll grope anything…
He moved for the door, but McCarthy kept coming toward him,
with an enormous, devouring smile. Reaching for the handle, Tim
heard himself saying, inanely, to keep the man calm: “I was also at
your wedding. Helping out Miss Beale for the Star.”
“No kidding!”
McCarthy proceeded to smother him with a hug, to give his neck a
boozy kiss and his crotch a hard locker-room squeeze.
“We’re going to christen her Tierney!” he called out as Tim raced
toward the street. “Come to the church!”

CHAPTER THIRTY-SEVEN

February 21, 1957
Two days ago, Lyndon Johnson had complained on the Senate floor
about Secretary Dulles’s lack of response to his letter protesting the
administration’s apparent willingness to impose sanctions on Israel
over the continued presence of her troops in Egypt.
So now the CR Bureau had a sizable fire to put out. How odd to
find all these congressional crackers and cornpones suddenly so
enamored of the Jews, thought Mr. Hill, the bureau’s director, who
didn’t know whether Dulles’s delay in replying reflected a deliberate
stall, or a desire to insult the majority leader, or just the secretary’s
protracted convalescence. The old boy was still looking awfully frail.
Several feet from Hill’s office, Hawkins Fuller sat in his own,
having just finished up with Mr. Jerome Duggan, chairman of the
American Legion’s legislative commission. The Legion was ending a
three-day conference that had included a big dinner at the Statler
last night. Speaker Rayburn and Nixon had both shown, and Fuller
had been there with Lucy.
The evening’s other big affair had been staged by the International
Rescue Commission for Hungarian Relief, at the Mayflower, and the
Fullers had stopped off there, too. After introducing Lucy to the
Goldwaters, Fuller had listened to an ex–Budapest State Opera
singer perform the Hungarians’ national anthem in a moment that
seemed designed to evoke the “Marseillaise” scene from
Casablanca. The crowd had contained the usual charity-ball
locksteppers, most of the women looking like Margaret Dumont, but
there had also been many fervent, unfamiliar faces, so eager to help

that they would have settled for bread and water for their twenty-five
dollars.
Fuller had listened gravely while József Kövágó—six and a half
years a prisoner of the Russians, six and a half days the mayor of
free Budapest—told his stirring tale to the audience, among whose
nonhabitués, Fuller had suddenly noticed, sat Skippy, an honest-toGod guest at an event Betty Beale was chronicling for “Exclusively
Yours.”
Catching his eye, Fuller had nodded, as if the two of them had last
seen each other five minutes before at the coat check instead of two
years ago inside the New York Avenue bus depot.
Tim had just stared back, as startled as Kovajo must have been
when the door to his cell was flung open—or slammed shut.
“Mr. Fuller, I have a Mr. Laughlin out front.”
Yes, here he was, a day later, at four o’clock in the afternoon.
Fuller had known it would happen since last night; no, since he’d
gotten the telegram three months ago. Actually, he’d known it all
along, since the empty milk bottle had dropped from the tower.
He waited a minute, looking in his middle drawer for the blank job
application he’d put there three weeks ago, certain even then that
Skippy would come along to claim it. He set the manila envelope on
the blotter and walked to the receptionist’s desk.
Tim was reading the front page of today’s Star.
“Hawk.”
“Mister Laughlin?” asked Fuller, quoting the receptionist. “Not
Corporal?”
“Only on weekends.” He was flashing his fast, nervous smile.

Fuller tousled his hair. The receptionist, new, looked at them
quizzically.
They walked back to Fuller’s office, Tim on noticeably unsteady
legs.
“Well,” said Fuller, pointing to one of the New York papers piled on
a chair. “Roy Cohn is thirty years old. He gave himself a big birthday
party the other night.”
“Was Private Schine there?”
“Home with his fiancée, according to Miss Kilgallen. She doesn’t
note Roy’s feelings about the girl—only that he seems to be unhappy
over Zwicker’s being promoted to major general. You can’t say he
forgives and forgets.”
The cat still had a part of Tim’s tongue.
“Imagine,” Fuller continued, “if Zwicker were still commanding
Camp Kilmer. All those poor Hungarian refugees having to get their
teeth drilled by a Communist dentist.” He cleared the papers from
the chair. “Here, sit down.”
Tim had never been inside Fuller’s actual office, and he was
reminded of its owner’s old apartment by the negligence of the
arrangements—the tennis racket lying atop some out-of-order
encyclopedia volumes, the cardboard coffee cup next to the broken
thermometer on the windowsill. He felt the old desire to hoard and
decode the objects in evidence. He was relieved to see no
photograph of Lucy Fuller, and his heart leapt at the sight of the
Lodge biography.
“Here,” he said, handing Fuller the book he’d brought with him
today, a copy of The Last Hurrah. “A birthday present. Belated.”
Three weeks ago, on the first of the month, Fuller had turned thirtytwo.

For Hawk—
This time you get the book in advance.
I want the job.
It would be wonderful.
S.
“You missed thirty and thirty-one,” said Fuller.
I have to get over you.
Tim tried to ask himself why he was actually here. Because
Tommy had dipped him back into the world of who had what on
whom? Forced his head beneath its compromising sewage and tried
to hold him there? But if that was the reason, had he come here
seeking the poison’s antidote or its best dispenser, the beautiful
Lucifer who had, after all, given him his first trip through the
underworld?
“You’re going to be a father,” he said.
“A careless one. In May, I’ve heard.”
Are you my brave boy?
Tim stared at the familiar tweed overcoat lying on a table strewn
with file folders, and he thought he was starting to cry. “Is there really
something for me to do?” he asked, as briskly as he could.
Fuller picked the manila envelope up from the blotter. “Come with
me,” he said.

Outside, in the aisle leading through the rest of the bureau, Tim
asked: “Where is she?”
“Miss Johnson? She took early retirement.” Fuller noted Tim’s look
of surprise. “You honestly haven’t seen her?”
“No.”
“Or Grandma Gaffney, either, I’ll bet.”
“No, not her, either.”
Fuller understood how completely he governed Skippy’s world,
even now, two years after the self-imposed exile. But he discarded
the thought, telling himself that if he weren’t in command, then
someone else would be.
“Where is she?” asked Tim. “What happened?”
“You’ll have to call her and find out.” And when you know, Fuller
thought, maybe you can tell me; she walked out—more than two
months ago—and never came back.
Moving along the corridor outside the bureau, they passed photoportraits of Eisenhower, Nixon, and Dulles. Tim pointed to the latter.
“His son is a priest, you know. Avery. A convert.”
“Maybe the Reformation can ransom him back with an offer of my
mother, who’s still straddling the fence between Rome and Geneva.
With a bank balance that these days could fulfill a vow of poverty.”
An elevator took them down two flights and past the Miscellaneous
M Unit.
“I’m pretty sure I can get a good recommendation from Senator
Potter’s office,” Tim said hopefully. “I’m not sure he’d have much to

say himself, but Miss Cook will write something nice, and he’ll sign
it.”
“No florid encomium from McIntyre?”
“I don’t ever want to speak to him again.”
“You once said as much about me.”
He started to stammer out a reply, but Fuller relieved him of the
need for one by picking up the pace and administering a cheerful
poke in the ribs. The gesture depressed Tim; it lacked the intimacy of
the hair-tousling a few moments before and seemed to suggest that
they were just joshing old friends. He suddenly feared that’s all they
might in fact become, a fate more disrespectful to their former
romance than impassioned estrangement would be.
Entering the office that seemed to be their destination, Tim heard
Fuller ask the receptionist if they could see Mr. Osborne. The girl
buzzed him while Tim regarded a recently framed Time cover on the
wall behind her desk. The magazine’s Man of the Year was the
Hungarian Freedom Fighter, an artist’s handsome conception of
those who’d made the doomed revolution.
Once Mr. Osborne emerged, Tim judged him to be about thirtyfive. He looked athletic and a bit severe, but he greeted Fuller with a
hearty clap on the shoulder. It turned out the two of them were
handball partners at GWU.
“Osborne, this is Timothy Laughlin, a veteran of the United States
Army, a staunch defender of the Second Line of Communication in
France, and a proud member of our underfunded reserves. You’re
going to schedule an appointment with him to discuss one of those
positions being set up to administer the Refugee Relief Act. He has
excellent writing skills, passable French, congressional staff
experience, a charming disposition, and a terrifying grandmother.”

Apparently used to Fuller’s palaver, Leonard Osborne said only,
“Sure.” Turning to Tim, he added, “If you like, you can come back
right now and fill out the first of the forms.”
“Nope,” said Fuller. “No time.”
“Okay, then. Tommorow morning at ten o’clock. Bring a résumé,”
Osborne instructed Tim. “When you get here I’ll take you three doors
down the hall to the man who’s really in charge. You’ll find, I’m afraid,
that nothing happens very fast around here, even when it’s an
emergency.” He explained that the Refugee Relief Act, once it
actually passed, would entitle anyone fleeing a Communist state to
asylum.
“Thank you, sir.”
Tim’s ingratiating smile gave way to perplexity as Fuller nudged
him back into the corridor.
“Hawk, this is great, but I could have seen him now.” He waved the
manila envelope with the application he’d gotten from Fuller himself.
“It’s not as if I can’t take the rest of the day off from St. Mary’s.”
“You’ll be better off having your résumé with you.”
They’d reached the end of the corridor. Fuller guided Tim down
two flights of stairs and then opened the door to Twenty-first Street.
“Put on your gloves. It’s cold out.”
“You don’t even have a coat.”
“We’re not going far. Only a few blocks up and over.”
They walked fast to H Street and then turned west. In just his blue
suit, Fuller attracted even more stares than usual.

Brightening, Tim asked: “We’re not going to see Mary, are we?
You can’t walk all the way to Georgetown like that!”
“No, you can see Mary on your own. Christ, it is cold.”
Tim removed his scarf and looped it over Hawkins’ neck, as if
garlanding a Christmas tree. Fuller responded by putting an arm
around his shoulder, in such a way that would have left anyone
thinking this was his kid brother.
They reached a red-brick house that was in total disrepair at the
corner of Twenty-fifth Street.
“There’s no lock,” said Fuller. “Go inside and wait for me. I’ll be
back in five minutes.”
Tim had found army life easy because all his life he had more or
less done what he was told. And it was of course the same now; in a
moment he was inside the house and trying the nearest light switch.
It didn’t work; nor did any of the others. The only available
illumination, a fading late-afternoon azure, came through gaps
between the mostly broken window sashes and the brown paper
covering the panes of glass. There was dust everywhere, but also
evidence of recent visitation: pillows plumped and straightened on
the couch; a newspaper from last week beside a jelly-jar glass on the
counter by the sink.
The house was so narrow that Tim had the sensation of being
inside a locker at school. But it was tall, too, dominated by a
staircase running up the eastern wall. Everything suggested
verticality and ascent. Even a little cut-glass chandelier, unlit, drew
one’s eyes to the ceiling above a bay-windowed alcove that might
once have held a small dining room table. The space’s bare little
octagonal floor looked like the abandoned ballroom in a doll’s house.
Tim climbed to the second floor, past a bedroom with some rags
on the floor and a small WC that, however filthy, seemed newer than

the rest of the house’s interior. Seeking the turret he’d glimpsed
outside, he continued up to the third story—a half-finished attic,
really—where he found it, a little cone whose walls leaned in above a
pile of clean blankets that had been spread upon the floor. Next to
them stood a space heater that, in the absence of any other
electricity, had been hooked up to two fat dry cells. The darkness
outside was growing, and soon the only possible light would have to
be coaxed from the glow of this contraption’s coils.
Where had Hawk gone? And what could he accomplish in a matter
of five minutes? Would he be bringing someone back with him?
Maybe Mary, after all? Or some other third party? Maybe the two of
us can become the three of us.
Or maybe Hawk had left him for a few minutes in this dark space
above the littered street to reacclimate himself to the fact that he
would always have to wait for Hawkins Fuller, for each brief chance
to be alone with him, separate from the rest of the world.
He removed the brown paper from one of the turret’s two tiny
windows and let in the last now-inky light of day. He looked out
across the street to the empty space where the neighborhood’s
gasworks had once been, before he sat down on the blankets and
tried to be patient. He told himself that later tonight he would borrow
Gloria’s typewriter and construct a new résumé. He would get to bed
early—it was easy with no more radio of his own—and tomorrow,
once the interview was through, he’d get back to St. Mary’s in time
for lunch. If he got the job, he would offer up the work to God,
confident he was helping those who’d arrived from Hungary to
worship Him once again.
He prayed for Hawk to hurry, to get here while he could still
pretend these were really the thoughts in the front of his mind.
Last night, when he’d seen Hawk’s face, he’d thought his heart
would collapse into itself. He’d forced himself to keep talking to

Father Molnar, pouring forth chatter about how much the work at St.
Mary’s meant to him, and Father Molnar, who’d depleted his life
savings by half in order to come up with the twenty-five dollars for his
own dinner ticket, had expressed delight.
He’d lain awake most of the night thinking what a delusion it had
been to believe that two years away could do anything, that he could
be strong enough to come back to D.C., or that he had come back
for any other reason than Hawk. This morning he’d gotten up for
early Mass at St. Mary’s, dragging himself from the artists’ loft as if
God were a boyfriend he was seeing on the rebound; and then this
afternoon, only an hour ago, he’d raced from the church to the
streetcar to the glass doors of State as if it were October of ’53 and
his heart had not yet been flooded and battered in all the ways it had
been since then.
The last man whose breath he’d smelled was Joseph McCarthy.
Now, as his surviving heart pounded louder and louder, mimicking
the volume of the footsteps coming up the stairs, he wanted only to
feel and taste the air coming from Hawkins Fuller’s mouth.
And there he was at last, in the room, Hawk, the silhouette of his
figure visible in the dark.
Fuller lit a match and held it under his face, which blazed up like
one of the La Tour paintings Tim had seen in Paris. He walked
forward. “Take your scarf.”
Tim rose from the blanket and slid the muffler, knitted by his
mother, from Hawkins’ neck, while with the hand not holding the
match, Fuller reached into his pocket for a candle. Lighting it, he
looked for a place to prop it up and, unable to find one, he let it drip a
wax base onto one of the turret’s windowsills.
Tim’s spirit leapt with a deduction: He hasn’t been up here with
anyone else; he would already have figured out the problem with the
candle if he had. He made this place for us.

Fuller reached into the other pocket of his suit, which in the
candle’s new light, Tim could see, bulged with a paper bag. From it
Fuller extracted a pint bottle of milk. He pulled off its small cap and
tossed the little circle of cardboard onto the blanket, like a poker
chip.
“Drink.”
Tim took two swallows and then Hawkins tilted the bottle further
back, until more milk was coming out than Tim could swallow. It ran
down his cheek and chin, and Hawk began to lick it off, and twice,
once gently and once not, to bite him. He took off Tim’s shirt and
then he removed his own.
In the rush to speed both of them toward nakedness, Tim spilled
the rest of the small bottle onto the bare, warped floor near the
blanket.
“Don’t cry over—you know,” said Hawk.
But he was crying anyway. “I love you, Hawk.” He pressed himself
against Fuller’s body, which was still tanned from the trip to Bermuda
with his wife.
Holding Tim’s shoulders from behind, bringing his lips to the boy’s
ear, Fuller felt how much he had missed him—the smoothness, the
frailty, the chatter and the tender heart. And so, to reclaim the
protective thrill that would come with ravishment, he felt himself
starting to say the words he knew he shouldn’t, words that were
actually a bit more true than he would have expected them to be, but
sufficiently porous and no doubt strategic that, if he believed in
Skippy’s loving god, or even in his own austere one, he would be
asking for forgiveness as soon as he said them.
But he said them anyway: “I love you, too.”

CHAPTER THIRTY-EIGHT

March 11–25, 1957
“How do you stand it? This is awful,” said Mary, sipping the glass of
milk. “But Dr. Sullivan insists it’s a good idea.”
Tim smiled at her from the same chair he’d occupied when she
first had him to dinner here three years ago.
“So,” she said, pointing to the pregnancy that was now quite
visible, even under her navy-blue maternity blouse. “You were
embarrassed to come see me?”
He laughed. As soon as he arrived, he had confessed—in the
high-pitched tones of wild happiness—the resumption of his
romance with Fuller.
“I hesitated to call you when I first got back,” he now explained,
“because I knew that if I came here we’d talk about him.”
“And you didn’t want to tempt yourself with even the sound of his
name.”
“Something like that. And then, once things did happen, I felt I
shouldn’t come around because of, you know, her.” It was the one
part that shamed and frightened him. As if things hadn’t been bad
enough before, Hawkins Fuller now had a wife.
“I actually read up on it,” he continued. “I wasn’t sure whether I
was committing adultery by being with someone married. It turns out
that I am, whereas I’d hoped my guilt in that department might be
limited to leading Fuller astray.”

They both laughed.
“Thanks again for these,” said Mary, pointing to the handkerchiefs
brocaded with shamrocks that Tim had bought at Garfinckel’s.
“They’re pretty.”
In fact he’d gone shopping for a St. Patrick’s Day present for
Hawk, but realized that there was now a problem of detection—what
if Lucy found it?
“Still,” he said. “It’s awful. I’ve had to shut her out of my mind. And
despite everything I’m still taking Communion. Just making up my
own rules! It’s all different from the last time. With him, I mean.”
What he wanted to tell her and couldn’t was the reason the whole
cosmos and catechism had rewritten themselves. Everything was
different because Hawk had said “I love you, too,” a showering of
grace more powerful than any papal dispensation. He couldn’t tell
Mary because he believed that unless he guarded this secret,
Hawk’s words and their meaning might evaporate. It didn’t matter
that Hawk had said them only once. He had said them—and unlike,
it seemed, the catechism, they would remain in effect forever.
“What I can’t understand,” he did say, “is why you don’t
disapprove. I know you always liked me, but you never liked the idea
of it, and now it’s worse because of her.” He couldn’t bring himself to
say Lucy’s name.
“Maybe my own experience has broadened me,” she said, patting
her stomach. “In more ways than one.”
And yet, some part of her was absurdly distressed to think that she
—if Tim’s reading was correct—had committed adultery, too. She
had described to him the pregnancy and her plans: to leave next
month for the pious lady’s establishment in the Garden District, as if
she were awaiting a virgin birth.

For all his own revelations, Tim had been too much a gentleman to
ask who the father was.
“You think it’s Paul’s,” she said, all at once unable to have him go
on believing “the brewer” had been guilty of some sentimental slip-up
a year after marrying Marjorie. “It’s not.”
She proceeded to tell the whole story of Fred Bell, who just the
other day had testified as one of several “free world volunteers”
before Representative Kelly’s committee investigating the
government’s hobbled response to Hungary. “He got the Estonia
spot on the witness list,” she explained.
“That would be a pretty name for a girl,” Tim suggested.
“Estonia?”
They considered it for a moment and started to laugh. Tim came
over to sit on her side of the table. With his arm around her, he found
Mary to be unfamiliarly plump. Still, in most respects she was
herself. He knew there would be no crying; the shamrock
handkerchiefs remained dry and unreached for. He drew her head to
his shoulder.
“Does he know?” asked Tim. “The father, I mean.”
“No, though he will if I stay in Washington much longer.”
“Does Fuller know?”
“Same answer. The fiction I supplied to the department was
‘complications
from
appendicitis,’
necessitating
a
brief
hospitalization, immediate resignation, and a long convalescence out
of town. I’ve been lying low. And just lying. I had somebody tell the
bureau that the real attack and surgery happened in New Orleans a
few days after I left the office feeling poorly. I imagine Fuller suspects
more strongly than Fred does. A couple of times the phone has rung

and I’ve felt strangely sure that’s who it was: Fuller. It’s hard to be
certain, but Beverly knows, which means Jerry knows, and Jerry has
a big mouth, I’m afraid.”
Tim thought of how, in his own position here tonight, Jerry or one
of the “femme” friends Hawk sometimes spoke of would be making
jokes about having become, just like Mary, the Other Woman. But it
wasn’t the sort of joke he could crack himself. He apologized
instead: “I’m sorry I came over here so jazzed up and joyful, and
then went on talking and talking about myself—even after I could
see!” He placed a hand on the pleated rayon covering her belly.
“It’s all right,” she said, taking her head off his shoulder and putting
his on hers. “You’re happy, baby.” She sounded very Southern, as if
she were already halfway home. “Try to stay that way.”

Two weeks later, as Fuller lit a cigarette, Tim said: “You haven’t
noticed. I’ve given those up for Lent.”
“If you really loved God, you’d give up milk.”
Or you, Tim thought.
“The American Communist Party has given up violence and
spying,” he replied instead.
“For forty days?”
“Forever, they say. There are ‘various roads to socialism,’ and
democracy now seems to be one of them. Maybe all this will be
encouraging to Woodforde.”
Fuller thought of the conversations the two of them had had about
the Nation writer, whose new inner conflict was so different from
Skippy’s enduring fervor. Timothy’s blazing political belief matched,

of course, the religious zeal, but to Fuller’s mind neither had ever
seemed to go with the simple freckled rest of him. He was like that
Iowa schoolgirl Preminger had just picked to play Joan of Arc: no
matter how hard she tried, once they released the picture you’d still
be seeing a cornstalk instead of a burning stake.
“Hawk, one or two of the Hungarians I’ve met are hearing rumors
the government’s going to shut down the refugee program—that the
U.S. is going to return to normal quotas or let in only the applicants
whose relatives are already here. A couple of people waiting to get
out of the camps in Austria may have committed suicide. I mean, we
won’t do this, will we? We’d be betraying them twice.”
“Your elected officials just haven’t gotten around to passing the bill
that will keep the spigot open. I get to make phone calls on its behalf
every day.”
“Okay,” said Tim, not fully reassured. “I had another note from Mr.
Osborne, very nice. They have to do all these checks and so forth.
That’s what’s slowing things down. You guys are worse than the
army! Speaking of which: Major Conroy sent Mr. Osborne a ‘superb
recommendation.’ So at least says Mr. Osborne. If it’s true, it was
awfully nice of Conroy: I’m pretty sure he thought I was a pain in the
neck, especially at the end. Anyway, I just wish they’d speed things
up and hire me.”
He leaned in and kissed Fuller’s bare chest. They had climaxed
once already, but as they lay on the blankets together Tim was once
more hard against Hawk’s stomach, experiencing, he thought, a kind
of unified happiness: God and politics and love were for once aligned
in peaceful coexistence.
The other day he’d bought a portable radio and brought
Set to Twilight Tunes on WRC, it was now playing “These
Things.” Hawk, who had greeted the radio’s arrival
questioning look, casually reached over and moved the dial

it here.
Foolish
with a
until he

landed on Bob and Ray. Wally Ballou was running for mayor, and
after a moment or two Tim was enjoying the comic routine even
more than the romantic music. “They used to do ‘Mr. Trace, Keener
Than Most Persons,’” he explained to Fuller.
But at the first commercial he clicked off the little box, the better to
concentrate on kissing Hawk, who soon flipped him over and entered
him. Their rhythms and avidity matched; familiarity—their own history
—now allowed them to merge with a completeness they hadn’t been
able to manage, even during the good moments, three years before.
Hawk pulled on his hair a precise moment before they both came.
The days had grown a bit longer, but even so, by the time the two
of them were finished the streetlamps had come on. Realizing it was
time to go find his Plymouth and drive home to Alexandria for dinner,
Fuller retrieved his car keys from under one of the blankets.
“Are you eating much these days?” he asked, brushing his hand
over Tim’s rib cage.
“I’ll buy myself a sandwich on the way home,” Tim explained
through a dreamy yawn. “On nights when Woodforde’s girlfriend tries
to cook, everybody flees. You know, Mr. Osborne says the job will be
in the main State Department building, so if it comes through I
thought I’d try to get a little place not far from where you used to be
on I Street. I can cook for myself then.”
Fuller found himself suddenly wary. Inside Skippy a future little life
was rising, as surely as the white-brick apartment house beginning
to grow from the ruins of the gasworks across the street.
“Where exactly are my jockey shorts, Timothy?”
“I was hoping to steal them.” He laughed. “Try under the plaid
blanket, near the radio.”

Fuller dressed in the gathering darkness, but with only a sandwich
awaiting him, Tim lingered in the makeshift bed. Fuller glimpsed his
face in the orange glow of the space heater; it looked like some
small ornament lit by a Christmas bulb. Its cheer and serenity
prompted him to remember the expression’s opposite, a face Tim
had shown during an especially tormented moment back in the early
days, while he’d been explaining yet another spiritual infraction he
was afraid of committing.
“Tell me, Skippy. Why give up anything for Lent when you’re not
even taking Communion?”
“I am taking Communion.” Tim’s eyes remained closed and he was
smiling. He seemed to be falling asleep, pleasantly exhausted.
It was becoming clear to Fuller that Skippy now believed
everything between them to have been somehow miraculously
sanctified; he seemed to have reached the conclusion that he, too,
could live as a bigamist. Just as Hawkins Fuller could go home to
Lucy, Timothy Laughlin could go home to God—until it was again
time to meet here, which the two of them would keep doing until the
house was torn down, at which point they would presumably start
going to the “place not far from where you used to be on I Street.”
From the moment he had allowed things to resume, Fuller had
feared that Tim would end up making trouble, would become a
hysterical version of Tony Bianco, threatening a scene—not for
money but assurance, for some further allotment of affection. One
morning he would show up on the Fullers’ suburban doorstep,
wracked with anger and some fresh twist of biblical shame.
But here he was: happy, calm, wanting not so much as a second “I
love you.” He had taken, it seemed, some vow of emotional poverty
that he was willing to keep six days a week, if only on the seventh, or
close enough, he could be released from it here. He would grow old
in this city, become like all the other skinny, obedient clerks and

bookshelvers keeping their heads down at the Library of Congress,
the ones who’d come to town years before to escape the fists and
cruelties of their fathers and the village hearties. He’d learn to cook,
to go to Sunday-afternoon concerts at the Coolidge Auditorium with
his chums. He’d save his money to go see the occasional musical in
tryouts on its way to New York. He’d lose the political zealotry, once
he finally realized politics to be no more than the widgets turned out
by this particular company town. The religious quaverings would
subside, too, displaced into solemn, furtive acknowledgment of “Mr.
Fuller” when they passed in the corridor, and into more flamboyant
weekly worship of the same in the little place off I Street, where a
picture of the beloved would be kept out in a frame near the record
player, except when Fuller himself or anyone other than Skippy’s
fellow nelly clerks came to visit.
Timothy Laughlin would not be the big trouble that Hawkins Fuller
feared, the trouble against which Lucy’s money would shield him.
No, Skippy would be a grim safe harbor, one that would trap him in a
domesticity even danker than the one across the river in Alexandria.
The thrill of protectiveness and ravishment would be long gone,
replaced with a cup of coffee and a slice of cake and an ongoing
obligation to fuck the good little aging boy who had “given up
everything”—the nelly clerks would start to tell him—for Hawkins
Fuller.
Dressed now, Fuller lay back down on the blankets and took Tim
in his arms. The two of them wriggled around until they were
spooning, with Tim holding Hawk from behind, momentarily falling
asleep against his back, while Fuller faced the turret’s circular wall.
Unheard by Tim, he whispered: “I’m sorry.”
And he was, he thought; maybe even more than he knew.
As he started down H Street toward the office and his Plymouth,
Fuller passed the worst of the neighborhood’s gingerbread shanties
and wondered just how impressed the Negroes of Foggy Bottom

were by the knowledge that one of their own, the State Department’s
Dr. Ralph Bunche, had been dispatched to sort things out in the
Middle East. Fuller imagined that the feds would eventually name a
park for Bunche somewhere along here, probably once the last of
the Negroes had been priced out of the area.
He entered State on Twenty-first Street and found a couple of
people still in the bureau. He half hoped that Mr. Hill might be there
to see him returning to his desk at such a late hour. Inside his office
he hung up his tweed overcoat and then his suit jacket, both of them
smelling faintly of the brewer’s condemned love nest.
The news clippings that filled his In box showed Dulles and Ike
talking to Macmillan in Bermuda, where last month, lying on a chaise
longue in her swimsuit, Lucy had at last begun to look pregnant.
Someone had also dropped on his desk a memo announcing that
Llewellyn Thompson would now move from the Austrian embassy to
the Russian. No cookie pusher he, everyone agreed, though Fuller
and Mr. Hill would still have to make a few mollifying visits to the
SOB before he could be confirmed. Styles Bridges, for one, would
almost certainly be among those claiming that Thompson had been
a little too sympathetic to “our so-called Soviet allies” back when he’d
been the second secretary in Moscow during the war. Someone
might also note that the nominee hadn’t married until he was fortyfour.
Fuller made his shirtsleeved way back out of the office and into the
corridor; he then took the stairs down to Osborne’s office in Eastern
European Affairs. Alas, his handball partner and everyone else in
EEA had gone for the day, just as Hungary had gone from being an
emergency to an ordinary geopolitical given.
Starting back for his own office, Fuller decided—all at once and
instead—to travel the most direct route toward accomplishing the
task he had in mind.

The door to the Miscellaneous M Unit stood open, surely a first
and no doubt because of an ambassadorial appointment that would
be even more widely discussed than Thompson’s: Scott McLeod’s
rumored, imminent dispatch to the Dublin embassy, a reward for the
years of scrubbing he’d done here and a quiet way of saying that
that job might at last be done. Even so, McLeod would have his
Senate enemies as surely as Thompson had his. Hence the open
door: no harm showing off the friendly informality with which his
operation had done its business at State.
Fred Traband was putting on his coat. “May I help you?” he asked.
“Fuller. Congressional Relations.”
“Oh, right.” Traband’s look of friendly recognition was replaced by
disdain. He tried to recall any word he’d had about Fuller’s being
summoned once again. Perhaps this time the Harvard man had
done something so flagrant he wouldn’t be able to fool the machine.
“It’s about a fellow who’s getting close to a refugee-relief job.”
“What about him?” Traband asked.
“He’s got a few problems in the area you once questioned me
about. For his sake and the department’s I think the appointment
ought to be blocked right now, before some Hungarian begins
blackmailing him to get asylum.”
Make it easy on him.
Traband’s expression softened. Maybe he’d been wrong about
Fuller all along. Or maybe the guy had experienced the sort of
behavioral conversion that the Miscellaneous M Unit always insisted
was possible. He looked at his watch. “I’m running late,” he said.
“But the boss is still here. Why don’t you go in and give him a word
to the wise?”

How to Be a Man, thought Fuller, in the last seconds before he
shook hands with Scott McLeod.

CHAPTER THIRTY-NINE

April 21–22, 1957
The Laughlins’ Easter dinner was taking place in Stuyvesant Town,
Grandma Gaffney having at last ceded her holiday territory with the
proviso that this was her absolute limit: she would never get on a
ferry to Staten Island.
“Those damned priests take advantage of you every whichaway,”
she was now telling her grandson. She did not like the idea that Tim
was working for sandwiches and pocket money.
“It’s charity,” Francy explained for her brother. “It’s something
good.” In fact she did think it strange that Tim had been doing unpaid
church work for three solid months.
“Don’t think of it as charity, Grandma,” said Tim in his own
defense. “Think of it as a good investment, like those two shares of
AT&T stock that Grandpa used to have, the ones that kept splitting.”
He was the only one allowed to tease her, but while the others all
laughed, she just stared at him, a vision of the prodigal, and wished
through her tight-set lips that Francy’s horrible little daughter would
stop romping around the room.
For everyone at the table, Tim’s return had been more the focus of
the day than their new outfits from Gimbel’s or even the turkey.
Finally moist, now that its preparation had shifted to Mrs. Laughlin, it
still owed its presence on the table to Grandma Gaffney, who
insisted that ham was something the Protestants served on Easter.
“Does she know she’s aligning herself with the Jews?” Francy had
whispered to her brother when the porkless platter emerged from the
kitchen.

“I wish you were still working for Joe!” declared Uncle Frank,
who’d never fully conceded the fact that his nephew had actually
worked for Senator Potter. “He’ll be back yet, you wait and see! They
say he’s going to be leading the charge for this fellow McLeod. The
English papers are supposed to be up in arms because we’re
sending the Irish a ‘cop’ for an ambassador. They seem to think his
methods are a little too tough—that he’s been spreadin’ all that fear
through the precious State Department. For them to complain about
anyone being unworthy of Ireland! Let’s talk about the methods
they’ve used over there for three hundred years. You don’t, by the
way, hear the Irish themselves complaining about McLeod, now do
you?”
Rosemary Laughlin touched Tim’s hand and remarked, feelingly,
upon the “perfect weather for a perfect Easter.” Still shy with her son
after such a long separation, she asked him about the Egg Roll on
the White House lawn. “You’d like to be there, wouldn’t you?” she
said to little Maria Loretta.
Tim explained that the Eisenhowers were actually spending the
weekend in Georgia.
“Speaking of eggs,” declared Uncle Frank. “He needs to be a little
more hard-boiled.”
The men at the table, even Uncle Alan, had grown more and more
impatient with the chief executive. They seemed to be waiting for
Nixon the way Fred Bell was, according to Mary; the prospect of an
Irish alternative held no interest for them. “For Christ’s sake,” Uncle
Frank had said a little earlier of John Kennedy, “his father went to
Harvard.” Nixon, Protestant though he might be, suggested the solid
strivers who’d sat beside Paul Laughlin on all those nights and
Saturdays he’d studied for his accounting certificate from LaSalle.
Tim scooped up Maria Loretta on one of her passes through the
room. “You don’t need the White House lawn,” he said, “but I’ll bet

you would like all the cherry and dogwood blossoms that are out.”
He stroked the girl’s shiny brown hair and agreed with her that
dogwood was a funny name for a tree.
And as he looked at her he thought of Hawkins Fuller’s daughter.
On Tuesday, he and Hawk had had plans to meet in the Foggy
Bottom house at four-thirty, after Hawk got through on the Hill trying
to shame a House committee into giving the Voice of America the full
hundred and forty million dollars Ike had requested for it. But when
Tim got to the turret, he found a note that Hawk had left atop the
blankets only minutes before: “Catching cab to Georgetown U
Hospital following premature birth of Susan Lydia Boardman Fuller.
Barely five pounds. Say your beads for her.”
Tim had spent part of this morning’s Mass praying for the baby,
whose sudden existence fascinated and repelled him. He felt glad
that this extension of Hawkins Fuller into the world was a girl: a boy
would have somehow made for a dilution of Hawk himself. Susan’s
being female allowed Tim to think that the baby belonged really to
her, to Lucy, in the way a child’s Jewishness was said to be passed
to it through the mother. And yet, truth required him to admit that
Hawk had helped to put this life into the world; its creation was
something the two of them, he and Hawk, could never achieve
together.
As he worried his way through all this once more, Francy tried to
keep her eyes off her brother. But she thought she saw his mood
taking one of the several dips it had in the hours since her arrival
here this morning. She got up to clear the dishes.
Tim meanwhile tried to cheer himself with the thought that Hawk
had also brought life back to him. The adultery they were committing
was their creation, a sin the two of them were building together, and
from which Lucy was forever excluded. This morning in church he’d
prayed not just that Hawk’s daughter be healthy, but that the lurid

new light burning within himself not be scuppered like the last candle
after the last Mass.
They had met only once since the afternoon when “These Foolish
Things” had played on the radio. It had been a rushed encounter,
Hawk acting the way Tim could remember from some mornings three
years before—studiously brisk; lustful and withdrawn all at once. He
had ascribed the behavior to worry over Lucy’s increasingly difficult
pregnancy. The premature birth had convinced him of it. The
remoteness was inevitable, and nothing much to worry about. Think,
too, of the note Hawk had left in the turret: for him to have been
mindful of their afternoon rendezvous even at a time like that!
As he retold himself all this, his spirits came back up. “I’m going to
do the dishes with Francy,” he announced. “See, Grandma?
Everything’s exactly the same. Even here in Stuyvesant Town.”
It was Tim’s father who replied to this observation. Though he was
the family striver, the agent of its transformative ascent, Paul
Laughlin now declared, with a sudden wistfulness, “Nothing stays the
same. Did you hear the pope this morning? Talking about atomic
energy?”
He had been relieved to see his son, though he suspected that
Tim was traveling on thin ice, carrying secrets that looked even now,
while the boy walked to the kitchen, as if they might make the floor
give way beneath him.
At the sink Tim washed and Francy dried, and the ventilating fan
blew the last of the kitchen’s cooking smells into the Stuyvesant
Oval.
“You wouldn’t let me do this a few Christmases back,” Francy
recalled. “I was pregnant with Maria. You may even have mentioned
my ‘condition.’”

“Did I?” Tim asked, laughing. “Well, it was a productive worry. See
how healthy she turned out?”
“I hope the next one will, too.” She rapped the wooden board
beneath the dish drainer.
“Are you?”
“Yes, and believe me, in our neighborhood, you go three years
without dropping another, people think something’s very wrong.”
“Do you want to sit down?” He pointed to a stool by the broom
closet.
“Don’t be ridiculous. But let’s sit down together.” She turned the
faucets off.
“Lent’s over,” she said, handing him a cigarette as they settled
themselves at the small table. “Talk to me.”
“Bless me, Sister, for I have…”
“That’s not a bad beginning. Keep going.”
“I’m fine.”
“You’ve been telling me that for three years now.”
She reached back to the counter and picked up the cuff links he’d
removed from his shirt when he started on the dishes. She pressed
them into his hand. “I still don’t know who ‘Hawkins Fuller’ is, but one
of these Christmases or Easters that old lady will finally be dead”—
she pointed back to the living room and Grandma Gaffney—“and
while she’s down there complaining about too few Jews being in Hell
—”
Tim began to laugh, evasively. Francy pressed the cuff links
harder against the palm of his hand.

“—I’ll finally be cooking the dinner on Staten Island, where there’ll
be two children, no more, and my sullen son of a bitch of a
husband.” Over her brother’s nervous, lighthearted protest, she
continued: “And I want you to know that whoever this person is”—
she pressed the cuff links even harder into Tim’s hand—“he’s always
welcome in my house.”

Tim spent the next morning in the city, shopping with his mother at
Gristede’s and then having an early lunch in midtown with his father.
He talked to each of them about the job he still expected to come
through before long. They asked him no questions that could be
deemed personal, though he suspected Francy had urged them to.
As it was, he took their reticence to be a manifestation of love, not
self-protection.
He had, God forgive him, deflected Francy’s own proffering of
love. Forcing the cuff links into his palm had been a kind of secret
handshake, and it had spooked him. Ending their conversation with a
joke about the stigmata, he’d given her a peck on the cheek and
turned the faucets back on.
His money had started running low, but after lunch with his father
he went into Brentano’s and bought James Michener’s The Bridge at
Andau. Amazed that a book about Hungary could be brought out so
fast, like a magazine, he carried it aboard his bus at the Port
Authority, where he looked north toward Forty-third Street and
wondered whether Hawk’s clarinet player could still be living there
five years after Ike’s rally at the Garden.
He was halfway through Michener’s book by the time the
Greyhound pulled into the District. Inside the doorway beneath Ken
and Gloria’s loft, he collected his mail and took it upstairs, his heart
hammering at the sight of the State Department envelope, and
pounding even harder once he tore it open and, above the signature

“Leonard F. Osborne,” saw the words “regret” and “due to security
considerations” and “unable to offer you.”
He stuffed the letter into his pocket and raced back downstairs, not
knowing where he was going. He wanted to call Hawk at the office,
but he couldn’t bother him while the baby might still be in jeopardy.
Besides, it was now past six; Hawk had probably left for home, and
even for something as bad as this, Tim would not break his vow
never to dial the number in Alexandria.
At the door to the street he found Woodforde, lighting a cigarette
on his way out. A queasy, dyspeptic look played across the writer’s
face. “If I marry this girl,” he said, “I’m going to wind up skinnier than
you.”
They started down F Street together.
“I didn’t get the job,” said Tim, thunderstruck all over again by
verbalizing the news.
He couldn’t tell Woodforde about the “security considerations,”
which, after all, had to be about that. True, Woodforde had
expressed his own belief in the inconsequence of such things—I
don’t care about you and Fuller, that’s your own business—but it was
still too shaming to admit to himself, let alone anyone else, that he
might be a security risk. He realized that he felt guilty, not angry, and
he wondered helplessly how Osborne’s people could have known.
“Sorry, kid,” said Woodforde, sincerely. “You know, there are a
hundred ways for you to help out the Hungarians and get paid for it
without having to be inside Dulles’s closed shop.”
Tim counterfeited some cheer. “You’re right. And I’d better find at
least one of them if I’m going to make my—I should say your—rent.”
“Don’t worry about that. Listen, you want to copyedit Armed and
Dangerous? The girl doing it in New York stinks, and I’ve got a little

bit left of the advance that I can pay you with. McIntyre once told me
your grammar is ‘cleaner than a nun’s shaved scalp.’”
“Thanks,” Tim replied, abstractedly. “I’ll think about it. But right now
I’ve got to go in the other direction. I’ll see you tomorrow.”
“Okay, take it easy, Laughlin. Everything’s going to be all right.”
Woodforde watched him walk away and then called out after him:
“Come Cohn or come Schine!”
Tim tramped across the city for nearly an hour, all the way up to
Georgetown. Passing two little French restaurants on M Street, he
proceeded farther north, making himself believe that he was headed
toward Mary’s, though in fact he had another destination, a
dangerous one, in mind. He wanted to see Hawkins’ daughter.
He would just glimpse her behind the incubator’s glass; no one
ever had to know he’d come and gone. Since visiting hours would
already be over when he arrived, this wouldn’t really be a visit; he’d
find some nurse who would let him take a peek, and while he stood
in front of the window, a little like Stella Dallas, he’d be able to figure
out what he’d been feeling about the child’s presence in the world.
The prayer he’d say for her would be made more potent by familiarity
with its object.
A receptionist scolded him for showing up so late, past eight
o’clock, and looked at him suspiciously before imparting the good
news that Mrs. Fuller, after six nights here, had been discharged this
afternoon. Moreover, the baby was thriving sufficiently to have gone
home with her.
He thanked the woman and asked for directions to the chapel. She
reminded him that it was late but allowed as how he could make a
quick stop.
He prayed not for Susan Fuller but for himself; for steadiness. He
told himself that he was just tired from the bus ride and weak from

missing supper. He’d been rattled by the kind of bad news everybody
has to put up with once in a while. Not getting the job might be a
disappointment, but Woodforde was right: there were other ways to
be useful. And while the mention of “security considerations” left him
fearful, all of that might still be a mistake, or part of some generalized
tightening-up that had nothing to do with him in particular.
Hawk loved him, and Hawk’s child was healthy.
He prayed that Mary’s would be healthy, too, and he promised, if
he could think of a way, that he would help it, even after it had been
adopted. He’d already told Mary he would take her to the airport on
Wednesday, but he should ask if she wanted him to go to New
Orleans, as company for the weeks ahead. He could stay at the
rooming house on Dauphine Street, or even with Mr. Shaw, Tristan’s
sword lying between them.
For now he would find his way to a streetcar. He would go back to
the loft, and tomorrow he would pack boxes at St. Mary’s.
He would ask for no more than he already had, and things would
yet be well.

CHAPTER FORTY

April 24, 1957
Mary dialed Eastern Airlines to confirm her late-afternoon nonstop to
New Orleans. Seven months and two weeks was awfully late to be
flying, but no one would notice anything under her boxy spring coat.
Beverly and Jerry Baumeister were in the other room. They’d come
to say goodbye and pick up a set of keys for the wealthy girl in
Senator Douglas’s office whom Beverly had found to sublet the
furnished apartment for six months. The outside date meant nothing;
Mary knew that she’d never be back.
“I’ll be right out,” she called.
“Take your time, we’re fighting,” answered Beverly.
Beverly and Jerry had treated Mary to a big late breakfast and,
having both taken the day off, were now deciding whether to see a
lunchtime showing of Funny Face or Moulin Rouge.
Jerry had been arguing for the latter, but Beverly conceded
nothing to her spouse: “It’s five years old and it’s got Zsa Zsa Gabor.
Why are they bringing it back to the MacArthur now?”
“To show solidarity with the Hungarians?”
Husband and wife laughed.
“Maybe to catch the overflow of Francophiles who can’t get into
Funny Face,” said Mary, entering the room.
“Come with us,” Jerry and Beverly urged in unison.

“I can’t. Really.”
Beverly saw that she meant it, and she nudged Jerry to get
moving. “Okay,” she said, tapping her purse. “I’ll give Kay the keys
tomorrow morning. I tell you, she’s right out of The Philadelphia
Story. God, Mary, I thought you were sort of blue-blooded when we
first met. And so beautiful. You, not her. I remember the first time you
walked into the bureau.” She burst into tears.
Mary put her arm around Beverly. Jerry looked on, as hopelessly
as any other male would have.
“Your baby’s going to be beautiful, too,” Beverly predicted.
“Probably fatter than Fred,” guessed Mary.
“Don’t stay down there,” Beverly insisted. “Don’t disappear as if
you’re doing penance. Promise you’ll come back.”
“Back to what?”
“Back to us. And back to whoever else is just around the corner.”
“You mean Mr. Right?”
“Yes. Or Mr. Second Right.” She pointed to Jerry.
“Second right!” he cried. “I’m not just around the corner. I am the
corner. Come on,” he said to his wife. “Time for Zsa Zsa, dahlink.”
He embraced Mary, and when he pulled away he, too, had tears in
his eyes. They were both remembering that night at the Occidental.
Do you know what they do with guys like me in Russia?
He took Beverly’s arm—all three of them were crying now—while
she handed Mary a small box. “It’s a bon voyage gift, not a farewell
present. And it’s for you, not for—you know.” She meant the baby,

but that suddenly seemed too painful to say; the infant wouldn’t be in
Mary’s possession long enough to prompt anyone’s gift-giving.
Mary nodded. “I’ll write,” she promised, kissing Beverly.
When the Baumeisters were gone, she sat down on one of the
freshly vacuumed couch cushions. She was wondering whether to
open the little box when the phone rang.
Fuller’s voice came through the receiver. “I never remembered to
disconnect mine, either. The missus had to remind me to.”
She supposed he knew everything after all. And why should she
be surprised by that? Or surprised by his having waited until the last
minute to be in touch?
“I’ve switched the service over to the Vassar girl who’s moving in
tomorrow,” she explained, as matter-of-factly as possible.
“Go downstairs in five minutes. A cab will be waiting to take you to
me.”
“Fuller, I’m not going to the department.”
“You’re going to Quigley’s drugstore. Near GWU. I’ll be at the soda
fountain.”
“Why don’t you just drive here in your Plymouth? My plane doesn’t
leave for hours.”
“I know. It leaves at five-forty-five. But there is no Plymouth this
week. It’s out in Alexandria at the disposal of the nurse taking care of
my little girl.”
“How is she?”
“Remarkable. Very small but very calm. Quite discriminating.
Standoffish, I’d say. We call her Garbo.”

I want to be alone. She almost said it, but it wasn’t true. She was
all at once nervous and again wanting company, even his. “If there’s
no Plymouth, why don’t you take a cab here?”
“I don’t want to be around if you have a surprise visitor, which is to
say, if Skippy gets there early. Come on, head downstairs. The
cabbie will be honking his horn any minute.”
She was soon at Quigley’s, on a stool, drinking the malted Fuller
had already ordered for her.
He sipped a glass of seltzer, and for a minute or two they said
nothing.
“So, he told you,” she finally said.
“He told me.”
“As of Friday, when I last talked to him, I’d have believed he
hadn’t.”
“And you’d have been right. He never said a word until yesterday
afternoon. When he called the office.”
She said nothing, just wondered why Tim had told him then and
not before.
“He called to ask after the baby,” Fuller explained. “And about
another matter. Also, of course, to set up a rendezvous.”
“In the turret.”
“His little castle in Spain.”
She pushed away the malted and swiveled the stool, as if it were
her typist’s chair, so that she could face him. “You condescending,
buck-passing bastard,” she declared, as evenly as she could. “It’s
your romance, too. You found the castle for it.”

“You’re right. It was my romance, too.”
Her hand went, involuntarily, to her stomach. It rested there,
protectively, for a moment. “‘Was’? Does he know that?”
“No. He’s dealing with a vocational setback right now.”
The answer’s coolness was, she realized, too much even for
Fuller. The display of sang-froid suggested the opposite, an agitation
that had prompted him to summon her here.
“Did he not get the job?” was all she asked.
“He did not get the job.”
“That was the ‘other matter’ he called you about.”
“Yes, but he wound up chattering mostly of you. In those little
grammatical torrents that issue from him when he’s nervous, as if
he’s reciting the Apostles’ Creed. He was sentimental. For some
reason he couldn’t bear the idea of your leaving without our saying
goodbye, you and me.”
“Tell me what happened with the job.”
“Osborne sent him a letter.”
“I thought it was more or less settled, a sure thing.”
“‘Security considerations’ arose.”
“About him?”
“Yes. I mean, they’re obvious enough, aren’t they?”
“How exactly were they obvious to Osborne? Or let’s say more
obvious than they would have been in February.”

Fuller didn’t answer. But when she looked at him, she knew. More
than that, she knew that he wanted her to know—just as surely as
Tim had once wanted to make a sincere confession to his priest, or
some of Jerry’s terrified friends had tried to tell McLeod’s lie detector
even more than they’d been asked to.
“You did this,” she at last whispered.
Fuller took a sip of seltzer and regarded the countertop.
“Did you decide, after all, that he was inconvenient?” she asked in
a furious whisper. “This is inconvenient, Fuller.” She placed his hand
on her stomach. “But it’s mine—mine at least to ease into the world.
Too bad there’s no one down on F Street that you could pay a
hundred and twenty-five dollars to to have Tim killed.”
For all her disgust, her sense that he had done the most
despicable thing possible, another part of her felt grateful to him,
because what made the act despicable also made it definitive, the
surest means of ending what had to end, now or later, with Tim’s
broken heart. And she knew, looking at Fuller, that his reasoning
matched her own.
“You think you did this for his sake, don’t you?” she asked. “You’ve
convinced yourself of that, haven’t you?”
“No, I did it for me. You’ll do the other part, the part that’s for his
sake.”
“And how will I do that, Fuller?”
“By putting me beyond the pale.”
“You want me to tell him the truth.”
“Make it hard on him.”

She got down from the stool and closed her coat. A coed who was
with her boyfriend smiled, enviously, in her direction. She wondered,
absurdly, whether she could get a cab outside Quigley’s or would
have to walk to the main entrance of the department to find one.
“What about you?” asked Fuller.
“Me?”
“Were you ever in love with me?”
He asked it with an absence of ego, just a kind of sympathetic
curiosity, taking the opportunity to tie up a loose end.
“No,” she answered.
“Well, that’s one small blessing.”
“I wish it had been otherwise,” she said.
“Why?”
“Because then I’d be able to forgive you.”
She brushed past the coed, and he called out to her, with
surprising gentleness: “You already have.”

The ticket agent handed Mary a complimentary flight bag for her
incidentals. Reaching for it with her left arm, she thought she saw the
agent noting the absence of a wedding ring on the hand of this
pregnant passenger. But maybe she was imagining things. She put
her small purse and Beverly’s gift inside the bag, which she left
unzippered, before heading back to the departures lounge. Tim was
still getting her luggage weighed—four suitcases full of separates
and shirtwaists and books—and preparing to pay the overcharges.

He looked comically gallant, and sitting here, sipping her glass of
sherry, she thought it ridiculous that she should need his help. She
had recently decided that the essential cause of her plight, what had
brought her here, was a fatal self-sufficiency, an inner chilliness that
had left her unable to settle for Paul or fight for Fred. She was an
engine that couldn’t turn over; the only state of mind she could fully
embrace was hesitation, a conviction that to accept one man or life
was to forfeit another. She couldn’t welcome or destroy even the
baby that was quickening within her.
Maybe she didn’t love Fuller because he was her emotional
kinsman; maybe a small part of him did love Tim, just not a large or
brave enough part to rout the others standing guard over the
inviolable self.
Tim returned with a glass of milk and piece of pie.
“You should be having this,” he said, offering the milk. “For
Estonia’s sake.”
They tried to grin.
“Here,” said Mary, giving him twenty dollars. “For the cabs and the
overcharges. You’ll need it to get home.”
“Not on your life. I’ll be working soon. Though not as soon as I’d
hoped, it seems.”
She said nothing.
“The job at State fell through,” he explained. “Osborne’s office sent
me a letter saying I couldn’t satisfy their ‘security considerations.’
Fuller says it’s just somebody’s bureaucratic reflex kicking in. That
it’s unfair but actually means nothing. He says the whole operation
will change before long, and it’s just my bad luck to be coming
through before McLeod can get over to Ireland.”

“No,” Mary said firmly. “That won’t change it.”
“Honest, Mary, I don’t understand it. I lived a perfectly clean life in
the army, and there isn’t a soul here besides you who knows about
the way things are now between me and Hawk. Not even
Woodforde. Not even Tommy McIntyre.” This last name, his own
unexpected utterance of it, made him go pale for a moment. “You
don’t suppose that, based just on the old days, ’53 and ’54, he could
have—”
“It wasn’t McIntyre.”
“Well, it wasn’t you. There’s nobody else.”
“It was Fuller.”
“That’s not so.”
Make it hard on him.
“I saw Fuller this morning,” she declared.
“No, you didn’t. You would have told me before now.”
“They call the baby ‘Garbo.’ I’ll bet he told you the same thing.”
He clenched his fist on top of the table. She pushed aside the milk
and the pie and put her hand over his.
“No” was all he said—not a denial, just a refusal of her attention.
He freed his hand but made no other protest. He looked at her like a
technician reading a faulty instrument, one that had reported a flat
scan when everybody knew there had to be a pulse. Once more he
said “No,” before getting up. He nodded at her, as if she were a
stranger he’d sat down with by mistake, and he turned to go.
A strong impulse made her reach inside the flight bag and extract
Beverly’s present. She handed it to him, quickly, as if it were an

illegal payoff she’d been assigned to pass along.
As she pressed it on him, she could feel a mutation of the gift’s
meaning. The box—she had looked inside before leaving the
apartment—contained a glass paperweight, a sprig of cherry
blossom suspended in colorless amber. It had been Beverly’s way of
telling her to come back to Washington. Now it was her way of
saying to Tim that he would never come back here, but that what had
happened between him and Fuller, however finished, remained alive
somewhere, as sad and frozen and perfect as the blossoms on the
branch.
So would her baby, forever ungrasped and unvisited by its mother,
remain somewhere alive, still remembered and still real.

CHAPTER FORTY-ONE

May 6, 1957
The doors of St. Matthew’s stood open, so Monsignor Cartwright’s
microphoned words about the dearly departed were able to travel not
only to the seated congregants but all the way to those on the steps
outside.
The deceased, everyone was assured, “had played a role which
will be more and more honored as history unfolds its record.” After
all, Monsignor Cartwright reminded those assembled, the “watchman
of the citadel” had had “the fortitude to stand alone.”
“Never ‘alone,’” whispered Cecil Holland, out on the steps, to Mary
McGrory. “Not as long as Roy was around.”
Miss McGrory flipped her pad back two or three pages. Its Greggshorthand squiggles had caught all the monsignor’s comfortings and
regrets, including his observation that “few public figures in our time
have done so much for the United States and received so many
heartaches for it” as the man now on his way to eternal rest.
Joe McCarthy had died Thursday night from a “liver ailment.”
Some said he’d gone peacefully, with Jean at his side, while others
had him tearing at the IV tubes and bedsheets in a fit of delirium
tremens. Whatever the truth, there would be three ceremonies to bid
him farewell: the Mass here this morning; an afternoon service in the
Senate chamber; a graveside rite in Wisconsin tomorrow.
When the first of these ended and the mourners were ready to
leave St. Matthew’s, the vice president was at the front of them,
descending the steps with his wife and Alice Roosevelt Longworth.
Spectators were hard pressed to see anyone else from the

administration emerge, and Nixon took care to speak to a wireservice reporter more in the manner of a political scientist than a
politician: “Years will pass before Senator McCarthy’s work can be
objectively evaluated.”
On Friday night at Gawler’s funeral home, Tim had stood in a long
line of the mournful, the curious, and the silently triumphant, waiting
to file past the open casket in which McCarthy reposed. Despite the
mortician’s art, the corpse had looked nearly as gray as his tie. Two
and a half hours ago, Tim had arrived at St. Matthew’s early enough
to have gotten a seat, but he had his suitcase with him, and it had
seemed somehow disrespectful, not just awkward, to take it inside.
So he’d stayed on the steps, watching the eight Marines bring
McCarthy’s closed coffin into the church.
Senator Kennedy was now exiting, his left hand in his suit pocket,
his right hand brushing back his hair. He moved fast, almost furtively,
as if departing from some questionable assignation. He breezed past
his colleague, Senator Saltonstall, who, a few feet from Tim, was
talking with Senator Martin about how the GOP was now down to
forty-six seats. Miss McGrory and Mr. Holland began moving down
the steps, the better to overhear this conversation, prompting Tim to
sidle into a nearby clutch of observers, lest he be spotted by his
former colleagues from the Star.
Even so, he was still able to hear them.
“Jack didn’t look as banged up about all this as his papa,”
observed Holland. Joseph P. Kennedy had released a statement to
the press that outdid even Monsignor Cartwright in paying tribute to
the deceased. But Miss McGrory and Holland agreed that for cryptic
brevity nothing could top Harry Truman’s reaction to news of the
senator’s death: “Too bad.”
Fred Bell, looking like a plump, boutonniered floorwalker at
Hecht’s, passed in front of Tim, who recognized him from an

armband with the colors of the Estonian flag, as well as from the
description, half comical and half longing, that he’d been given by
Mary. According to her, Fred still didn’t know he was the father of a
child ready to be born in New Orleans.
Joe Alsop now marched down the steps, nodding hello to Betty
Beale and looking satisfied that the unpleasant business of
McCarthy’s life, however abbreviated, was over at last. Close behind
him came Scott McLeod, obliging the reporter at his side with a
comment: “As I said in my Senate testimony on Friday, those
criticisms of my appointment that are coming from abroad represent
extreme minority elements.”
“Is your work at State really done?” the reporter asked.
“To my knowledge no subversive personnel remain in the
department.”
Tim had fervently wished to avoid Tommy McIntyre, yet here he
came, without Senator Potter, as happy as if he’d been to a
christening.
“Mr. Laughlin!” he cried. “Christ, what a send-off from all the boys
in their long skirts! I counted nineteen monsignors and seventy-three
priests. I am not kidding.” He showed Tim a small notebook in which
he’d written down the figures.
“A page back from that—go on, flip it—you’ll find the eulogy I’m
trying to put into Charlie’s mouth.”
Those who had the opportunity to be with the late senator on
social occasions or when chatting with him in his office knew that,
regardless of differences which might have existed on political
issues, Joe was never vindictive. He was a warm, human, and
exceptionally charming person.

“Didn’t you find that yourself, Timothy? Didn’t he strike you as
such? He’ll be the first solon since Borah to be laid out in the
chamber. A lovely touch—to follow the great Prohibitionist with a
drunkard. The final seal of repeal!”
Tommy’s failure to get a rise out of Tim, whose face remained
weary and blank, inspired the Irishman to more strenuous rhetorical
effort. Looking like the kind of gargoyle this plain American cathedral
lacked, he hardly moved his rictus as the words came forth in a
cackling spray: “Of course Charlie may be too much in demand to
render this paean just yet. You should have seen him Friday night at
the Mayflower! Receivin’ he was the annual award of the Goodwill
Industries people. ‘Outstanding Champion’ of the nation’s
handicapped. I must say, even the blinking canes couldn’t compete
with the other honoree, a crippled telephone operator from Florida
who dials with her feet and types with her mouth.” Ready to
demonstrate the latter action, Tommy stuck a pencil between his
yellow teeth. Revulsion at last gave Tim the energy to move, even if
the only escape route would take him past Miss McGrory.
But she was occupied fending off a fierce scolding from a woman
with a big red-white-and-blue cockade stuck to her hat. “Your paper
writes malicious nonsense!” the woman insisted. “There is no
possibility Mrs. McCarthy’s baby will be taken from her. One-year
‘probationary period’ or not.”
Miss McGrory nodded forbearingly and explained that she
harbored no desire to see Tierney McCarthy returned to the New
York Foundling Hospital.
The woman wheeled around to resume her march down the
cathedral’s steps, and Tim realized it was Miss Lightfoot, showing
the distress of a radiation victim. He tried to move away, not because
he expected to be recognized, but from pity at the garish sight of her,
unglimpsed since the anticensure rally at the Garden. But her own
baleful eye took him in and made the identification.

“You!” she cried, before lowering her voice to a sickening baby-talk
imitation of the inscription he’d once made in the Lodge biography.
“‘You’re wonderful.’ Well, your Mr. Wonderful was sitting right up near
the front of the church, did you know that? With his boss, Mr. Hill.
Offering their politic homage to Senator McCarthy, whom they
thwarted during every single minute he was alive. And how is it Mr.
Fuller even now has a boss and a job in that cesspool over there?”
She pointed toward Foggy Bottom. “Because there are still people
who protect his kind, McLeod or no McLeod.”
Attracted by Miss Lightfoot’s again-increasing volume, people
began to stare. Tim struggled to get past her, needing to flee before
Hawk, who he’d never imagined would be here, came down the
steps and saw him. Tightening his grip on his suitcase, he thought
he was managing to get to the other side of Miss Lightfoot when her
hand was able to reach out and detain him long enough so that she
could whisper, straight into his face: “Cocksucker.”
Finally at the bottom of the steps, he looked back up them like the
tourist who never again expects to see the Acropolis. It was at this
moment that he caught sight of Woodforde near the cathedral’s
doors.
The writer noticed him, too. Concerned by the suitcase, he made a
gesture that asked: “What gives?”
Tim responded with a reassuring wave, but Woodforde knew
better. He cupped his hands near his mouth and forcefully called out:
“Don’t.” He’d sensed that something had gone very wrong between
Laughlin and Fuller—and the single suitcase could hold just about
everything Tim had in his part of the loft.
“You look awful!” Woodforde called down the steps.
“Thanks!” answered Tim, hoping to sound humorous, before
making a getaway down Rhode Island Avenue. He had most of the
day ahead of him before his bus was scheduled to leave: he’d gotten

the cheapest fare, on a coach that wouldn’t get its passengers to
New York until after midnight. Even with Woodforde’s copyediting
money, four months at St. Mary, Mother of God had finished off his
savings; for the first time in his life he wasn’t sure where he’d be
sleeping tonight. He’d not told his parents or Francy he was coming,
and he couldn’t picture himself arriving on either doorstep in the
middle of the night. What he would do tomorrow, once he woke up,
seemed even harder to imagine.
He wished, God forgive him, that he wouldn’t wake up. Two weeks
had done nothing to lessen his black realization that this time he had
not renounced Hawk—oh, the noble ridiculousness of his two-year
enlistment!—but that Hawk had renounced him.
He went into the Peoples drugstore to get a half pint of milk before
taking his seat on the bench in Dupont Circle, where he knew he’d
been heading all along.
He understood that Mary had revealed what she had at the airport
—It was Fuller—to shock and toughen him, as if a bucket of the
coldest water might effect his Lazarene rise from the stupor of
unwise love. But he’d walked all the way home that afternoon feeling
strangely certain he’d become invisible.
Yesterday he’d sat on another bench, on the Mall, watching smoke
rise a thousand feet into the air: the Johnson & Wimsatt lumber yard,
down on Maine Avenue above the docks where Mary used to buy
fish, had burned to the ground, requiring every fire company in the
city. Remembering, as the catechism had long ago told him, that
despair is a particular affront to God—the rejection of every good He
might still have in store for one—he had wished he were rising on
the columns of smoke, incinerated but released, upward and gone.
He had decided to leave last night, while the radio was
broadcasting the arrangements for McCarthy’s funeral. He would go
to St. Matthew’s on the same commemorative impulse that had

taken him to Gawler’s and that had now brought him here. Before
going to the church, he had made up his mind that he would stand
where he’d stood after the wedding; he’d blend into the crowd and
then he would go, would begin to get lost—so thoroughly he’d be
untraceable even to Mr. Keen.
At the cathedral he had found half the cast of the old lightscamera-action Caucus Room. There had even been some
discussion on the steps about whether a glinting head in one of the
pews, visible only from the back, might belong to G. David Schine.
Tommy; Miss McGrory; the lunatic Miss Lightfoot; and, as he now
knew, Hawk. The two of them had been there together, each as
unaware of the other as they’d been at the Draft Ike rally back in ’52.
He put a straw into the milk and looked over toward the
Washington Club. Today was turning out to be as warm as the
wedding day had been. It was so lovely one could imagine Jean
McCarthy tossing a funeral wreath as if it were her bridal bouquet.
Closing his eyes, he realized that he’d not said so much as a
single Hail Mary for the repose of McCarthy’s soul. Silently, he
recited one now, and followed it with one for himself. He prayed not
for forgiveness or happiness or even strength, but only to make the
merest murmuring demonstration to himself that he was still alive.
He went on to say a third and fourth Hail Mary and decided he would
recite a whole decade, even though he lacked his beads.
As he prayed, he could see the orange light of the sun on the
backs of his eyelids, and then, just beyond this interior glow, he
could feel the tortoiseshell frames of his glasses being lifted from his
face.
“How many fingers?”
He opened his eyes and answered: “Three.”
The Father, the Son, and the Holy Ghost.

“There. You’re healed.”
Hawkins sat down and pointed to the receding figure of his boss,
Mr. Hill, from whom he’d peeled away at the edge of Dupont Circle.
“Nice day for a funeral,” he continued. “McCarthy’s. We were there
together, Hill and I, and decided we’d walk to our next milestone in
legislative diplomacy.”
“Where’s that?”
“The Irish embassy, up near Twenty-third. I told him I’d catch up.
We’re early as it is.”
“And why would you be calling on my people?”
Even now—shocked by Hawk’s sudden presence, and still
smothered in despondency—he had fallen right into the old bright
febrile chatter, as if he were inside the turret or back on I Street,
trying to please his beloved.
“We’re going up to answer a few last questions that some
Hibernian-American legislators, Democrats all, have raised about Mr.
McLeod’s nomination. A small meeting at which the actual Irish will
be assuring the senators they have no real objections.”
“Ah.”
Fuller pointed to the suitcase. “Do the Hungarians no longer
require their cans of Reddi-Wip? Can St. Mary really afford to give
you a day off from dispatching them?”
“I thought I’d go to New York.”
“For how long?”
“I don’t know. Awhile.”

“Two visits to your sister in the space of three weeks? After no
more than three in two years? She’ll be a happy woman.”
They were talking as if he’d be back, when they both knew he
never would; talking as if he were unaware of what Hawk had done,
when they both knew that Mary had been made the instrument
through which he knew everything.
Make it hard on him.
It was Fuller.
“Here,” said Tim. “Take this.”
He withdrew a small object, covered in a handkerchief, from the
pocket of his suit jacket. Putting the thing into his own coat without
unwrapping it, Fuller was aware only that it had the shape of a
baseball sliced in half and was surprisingly heavy.
“I hear it was a short funeral for such a high Mass,” said Tim.
“There wasn’t much to eulogize. And the corpse had to get to the
Senate chamber. It’ll be getting there more punctually than it had
been showing up of late, from what I hear.”
Tim stared beyond Dupont Circle toward New Hampshire Avenue
and said nothing. After a moment, Fuller rose to his feet and then
pulled Tim up onto his. The taller man put his arms around the
shorter one and whispered, audibly this time, “I’m sorry.”
“For what?” asked Tim.
Everything, thought Fuller. But he couldn’t bring himself to say it.

CHAPTER FORTY-TWO

May 7, 1957
Tim bought the New York Mirror’s early-morning edition at the only
newsstand still open inside the Port Authority and discovered that, a
few hours after making his quick getaway from McCarthy’s funeral,
Senator Kennedy had been awarded the Pulitzer Prize for his book,
Profiles in Courage.
Just a few buses were still coming in at one a.m., and none were
going out. Tim sat on a bench near the terminal’s Eighth Avenue exit
and read the Mirror’s coverage of the funeral services. By the time
McCarthy’s body had reached the Senate chamber, Nixon was
sitting in the front row and the galleries were jammed, but only one
member of the president’s cabinet had shown up. Father Awalt, who
had married Joe and Jean in ’53, had today said the prayers from
the rostrum, while Senator Flanders bowed his head and Mrs.
McCarthy watched from the cloakroom doorway. A Senate page had
fainted from the drama and the heat. “You never get over your first,”
Tim could imagine Hawk or Woodforde whispering.
And then it was over. The body had been flown back to Wisconsin,
with Johnson and Knowland leading a delegation of twenty-nine
senators, by no means all of them true believers on the order of
Styles Bridges, who had declared that “Joe literally gave his life to
preserve freedom for all Americans.” One columnist was urging Jean
—now past thirty, after all—to run for Joe’s seat and return to
Washington as the colleague of all those liberal hypocrites who’d
taken up half the seats on the funeral plane.
Tim was bone tired and uncertain of where he’d be spending the
night, but his suitcase, fortunately, was much lighter than any Mary

had taken to the airport. He’d thrown away half his things and left
behind most of the rest in Ken and Gloria’s loft. So he was now still
able to get out and walk, first to Ninth Avenue and then a dozen
blocks north, past the Laughlins’ old apartment, as well as Grandma
Gaffney’s, where the lights had been out, he calculated, for at least
four hours. A glow from the building’s basement window revealed Mr.
Mancuso, the super, to be up late, probably reading the sports pages
beside the coal furnace there was no need to tend on a warm night
like this.
Reversing direction and walking south, he reached the corner of
Eighth and Fiftieth, where he spotted a fortune-teller, a crazy, gypsylooking woman who had placed an old television tube—apparently
her crystal ball—atop an upside-down wooden vegetable crate. He
wondered at his own inability to stop and consult with her, as if, after
all his transgressions, that one might still be too great a sacrilege.
Back on Forty-second Street, he climbed the steps of Holy Cross
Church, just as he’d climbed them on the day of his First
Communion and on every other day for morning Mass before
classes at the school next door. The church was unlocked, and he
took a seat in a pew at the back. Close to the altar sat two derelicts
whose snores seemed to issue from the empty pulpit that had once
vibrated with the homilies of Father Duffy himself.
He recalled being here on V-E day, at thirteen years old, a few
months before transferring across town to St. Agnes’ Boys’ High.
He’d sat in his blue-and-gold school tie, listening to a priest describe
the new world that was surely aborning—while somewhere far
across it, in the Pacific, Hawkins Fuller must have been asleep on
his boat, wondering when he’d be asked to help invade Japan. The
distance that had lain between them then seemed no greater than
the two hundred miles of tonight’s bus ride. If Hawk were this minute
in the pew across the aisle, the distance would still measure out to
the same vastness, any separation of their flesh being the distance
in life that was now, forever, unbridgeable.

Tim decided that he would not pray tonight, not so much as a
single “Gloria Patri”—not because he was angry at God, or too guilty
to face Him, or too exhausted; only because he felt himself floating,
like a dust mote in the vacuum of space, where there was no
airwave to carry his cry. He looked up to the cross and the wellmuscled figure of Jesus—a body that looked too strong to perish
from even the suffocation that was the real cause of death by
crucifixion. He remembered the Lenten seasons he’d spent in this
church, all the long weeks when purple cloth wrappings turned the
statues into mummies, denying their plaster beauty to the faithful. At
those times he would crave the sight of Christ’s bloodied face and,
even more, His arched and gleaming torso. This is my body. Every
Sunday, even during Lent, he would take the Communion wafer onto
his tongue and into his mouth, Christ’s actual flesh, not the mere
symbolic commemoration of the Protestants. It was Christ’s body
that kept him alive, kept him from Hell and darkness. Only Hawk’s
flesh, which he could taste even now, could have made him abjure
Christ’s during that first year together. And even then he had
hungered for both. Now, with the collapse of the convenient folly he’d
lived these last few months—I’m still taking Communion. Just
making up my own rules!—he would be without either.
He had no idea whether the ferry sailed for Staten Island at this
late hour. Francy would be sure to take him in with less alarm than
his parents might display, but it might be dawn by the time he
reached her. At this hour he doubted that his grandmother would
open her door, not even if she recognized his voice, though maybe
Mr. Mancuso would let him sleep on the cot by the furnace.
Or he could just keep himself awake in an all-night diner, until it
was light.
He took his suitcase and left the church, walking west to Ninth
Avenue, where he once more rounded the corner and went north,
just for a block, before aimlessly starting down Forty-third Street,
back in the direction of Times Square. Halfway toward Eighth, he

heard the notes of a clarinet, quite soft, coming from the top floor of
an old brownstone across the street. The man playing had the
instrument sticking out the open window, as if the neighbors would
have no grounds for complaint so long as the sound didn’t travel
from his apartment to theirs through the interior walls.
Tim recognized the tune being played as “No Love, No Nothin’,” a
funny song from the war about self-imposed chastity on the homefront. But the man was playing it in such a slow and bluesy and
beautiful way that it had become another song entirely. Tim put his
suitcase down on the sidewalk and stood to listen, realizing now who
the clarinet player was.
I had an assignation that night with a musician. Who does things
you haven’t even dreamed of.
He wasn’t especially good-looking. Crew-cut and stringy, maybe
somewhere between Tim’s own age and Hawk’s, he wore thick
glasses and a T-shirt and probably nothing else below the line made
by the windowsill.

And that’s a promise I’ll keep.
No fun with no one,
I’m gettin’ plenty of sleep.

Sleep was what Tim wanted now, to sleep beside this man, to feel
inside himself the body of someone Hawk himself had been inside;
to connect with his beloved, his lost, by way of a conductor, if only
until morning.
Maybe the two of us can become the three of us.

He waited until the song was done before he nodded upward,
appreciatively, as if to indicate that he’d be applauding if it weren’t so
late and he weren’t standing so close to someone else’s curtained
window. The musician nodded back and signaled with his fingers,
making first a “five” and then the letter “A.”
He crossed the street, pressed the buzzer, and as he climbed the
stairs he crossed himself.

EPILOGUE

OCTOBER 16, 1991
U. S. Embassy, Tallinn, Estonia
So what will happen with the black man with the problems with the
sex?
The polymath minister-filmmaker had asked Fuller, when he
returned to the party from his walk, about Clarence Thomas’s
chances of being confirmed for the Supreme Court. And here, just
past midnight, was the answer, left on Fuller’s desk by Ms. Boyle.
She’d figured he might come back up to the office, late, by himself; it
had become something of a habit.
The piece of teletype said that Thomas had gotten through the
Senate, 52–48, about an hour ago in Washington.
“Let’s celebrate,” he might have said had Ms. Boyle still been here.
“Shall we break out a can of Coke?”
No, he would not have said that. Even he didn’t make such jokes
anymore.
He eyed the telephone and Mary Russell’s letter. Its stationery
listed her number.

He hesitated, beginning instead to write a letter of his own, to Mrs.
Susan Fuller Simonson, his daughter, telling her he bet no man had
ever received Halloween cards from his grandchildren so early,
surely a sign of her organizational capacities as a mother. Puzzling
over what to say next, he tapped his pen on the desktop—what ever
had happened to blotters?—and allowed his gaze to travel back to
Mary’s letter.
He knew he was going to do it, so he might as well do it now.
He buzzed the security officer on duty and asked him to make the
call; if he tried it himself, he would bollix up the long string of access
and country and area codes.
“Yes, Mr. Fuller.” Like the rest of the small staff, the security man
was getting accustomed to the odd hours of the number two. A
moment later he was buzzing him back: “Mrs. Russell is on the line.”
“Fuller?”
The connection was astonishing. Ms. Boyle had not been
exaggerating about the phones.
“Yes. Mrs. Russell?”
“Yes.”
“Russell. Where did that come from?”
The telephone transmitted her laughter from Scottsdale after a
moment’s delay that, he understood, had less to do with fiber optics
than the fact that even now, thirty-five years later, she was only
laughing against her better judgment.
“Before you tell me,” he added, “let me give you the number on
this end. It’s past midnight here, and if I lose you after the security

man at the desk goes home, whoever comes on will never be able to
patch me back through.”
He read off a long string of numbers from his business card, and
she repeated them. “Wait,” he said. “That’s the fax. Sorry.” He then
read the proper string, the one for the telephone, and she copied that
down, too.
“There,” said Fuller. “So what time is it where you are?”
“Two-thirty in the afternoon. Ten hours earlier.”
“Not fourteen hours later?”
“No.”
“Well, at least you’re giving me the time of day.”
No laughter.
“You got my letter,” she said.
“Yes. So who is Russell?”
“My husband, Harry. I married him a year ago. I’m talking from his
office in the house. He’s out playing golf.”
“Why did you wait so long to marry? Someone tell you the first
forty years are the hardest?”
“I was married for twenty-five years, from ’64 to ’89, to Paul
Hildebrand.”
“The name’s familiar.”
“The brewer.”
“Ah, yes! The lovesick brewer. How did that finally happen?”

“He came to New Orleans and found me, two years after he
divorced his very nice wife and was still covered with guilt.”
“Guilt. Is that going to be the theme of this conversation?”
“I don’t know. You made the call.”
“You wrote the letter.”
During the pause that followed, he fingered the envelope it had
come in. “What ever happened to the baby?”
“She grew up to be a wonderful young woman. This morning I’m
designing the leaflets for her campaign for the school board in
Amarillo. Desktop publishing. I’m a whiz at computers. She was
raised by fine people in Miami and five years ago, just as Paul was
getting sick, she managed to find me.”
“What’s her name?”
“Barbara. But I call her Toni. Long story. How is your own
daughter?”
“Raising three children back in Maryland. Making Halloween cards
three weeks early. I’ve never known a girl of her generation with less
ambition.”
“She got it from you.”
“I’m taking that as a compliment. There’s too much hard charging
all around. Especially from the girls.”
“Is that going to be the theme of this conversation? The social
decline of the world we knew when we were young?”
The brief pause Fuller took was extended, for less than a second,
by the satellite carrying his words to Mary. “I assume that he died of
AIDS.”

“He died of bone cancer. With considerable pain and a great deal
of cheer. When he was diagnosed he sent me a note saying ‘So
much for all the milk!’ I can’t imagine that he was ever infected with
AIDS, Fuller.”
He lit a cigarette. Amidst all the multivitamins and bran, Lucy had
never gotten him to stop smoking altogether.
“Providence, Rhode Island?”
“He never really lived anywhere else. For a little while, just after
Washington, he went home to New York—in a bad way. Never
finished his reserve duty. He admitted what he was and got
dishonorably discharged. He more or less fell apart at his sister’s
house until her parish priest found him a spot with some order in
Rhode Island. He only described it to me years later—half retreat,
half sanitarium. He was enough glued back together to leave in six
months.”
Fuller had spent most of his life parrying questions, not asking
them. The neediness of now having to do the latter bothered him,
and he was certain, even without her face before him, that Mary
knew it did. The dynamics of their old friendship, across eight
thousand miles and thirty-five years, had flung themselves together
in an instant, like the film of a building’s demolition running on fast
rewind.
“Why did he stay in Rhode Island?”
“There was no reason to be anywhere else. For fifteen or twenty
years he worked in the books department of the Outlet Company, the
last of the Providence department stores. When it went out of
business he took a job with an antique books dealer in an old arcade
just down the street. I visited him there about a dozen years ago.”
“I’m doing the math. I’m guessing he took you to a Reagan rally.
Unless it was bingo at St. Aloysius’.”

She wouldn’t answer.
“What was he like?”
“He bought me a nice Italian dinner. After drinks at his small, tidy
apartment. He was very nervous—not about seeing me; he was just
a fragile, nervous person. And yet curiously peaceful. He would have
been nearing fifty then, but for all his gray hair he looked much
younger. Thin. It was easy enough to still see the boy who first
walked into the bureau.”
I got the job. You’re wonderful.
“‘Peaceful’?”
“Yes, you get off easy.” She paused, letting it sink in, hoping it
would wound him even as it brought relief. “I don’t think he’d given a
thought to politics in twenty years, and he wasn’t the least bit
religious in any ordinary way. He told me he went to Mass once in a
while and never bothered with confession. But the peacefulness had
come from God, I’m certain.”
“And how are you certain of that?”
“Because he told me. He told me that one day twenty years
before, he’d realized, all of a sudden, while walking down a street in
the city some Saturday afternoon, that he’d spent his whole life trying
to make God love him—and that this didn’t matter in the slightest. All
that mattered was that he loved God. He told me that once he knew
this he was home free.”
“Well, then, besides the milk, so much for Bishop Sheen, too. ‘God
love you’—the words that threw open my mother’s checkbook.”
“He said it was the same with you.”
“What was the same with me?”

“That all that mattered was his loving you. That was enough, once
he realized it.”
“And you think that was true?”
“I think there was more to it than that. I think he was too nervous to
try loving anyone else. But it was true enough. And I think it’s more
than you deserved.”
She could hear him putting out a cigarette, the tiny hammering on
an ashtray bouncing up through space and down again.
“The fellow who’s your daughter’s father,” Fuller said. “Was he
Estonian or Lithuanian? I can’t recall.”
“Estonian. They’d borrowed the Lithuanians’ embassy the night we
met him.”
“I met him? I don’t remember.” He thought back to the morning’s
mental calisthenics and wondered if he’d done as well as he thought.
“Fred died in ’79,” explained Mary. “He would not have believed
anything that’s happened over there in the past two years, though he
always claimed he could see it coming.”
“I’m going home for good in a few months.”
“Are you still with your wife?”
“Yes.”
“Right,” she said, having expected as much.
She could feel—he could feel it himself—that whatever emotions
had prompted him to make the call had already subsided, that he
was about to succeed one last time at doing what he had always
done where Timothy Laughlin and that whole portion of his life were
concerned. He had come back from it, dispensed with it; he’d closed

and locked the cellar door and was climbing back up to the living
room of his existence.
“He was buried wearing your cuff links,” Mary told him. “His sister
found them on his night table, back at his apartment, the afternoon
he died in the hospital.”
After a longer pause than the others he had taken, Fuller said: “He
was a very nice boy.”
I’m pleased to meet you, Timothy Laughlin.
“Goodbye, Fuller.” She said it tenderly and hung up the phone.
He sat there for several minutes, attempting to think about the
young man he’d eyed on his walk near the walled Old City tonight.
He tried once more to figure out the best route to the Carnegie
Endowment from this house in Chevy Chase that Lucy was still
determined to buy. And he wondered if he might yet persuade her to
have one couple, no more, over for the White Nights.
All at once he heard a whistling sound, like an electronic teakettle.
The fax machine, he realized; it disgorged things only infrequently
and usually when Ms. Boyle was here. But a paper was now coming
out of it, insidiously, as if from an intruder who’d scurried away
before he could be detected slipping it under the door.
Fuller got up to take it from the machine’s tray. The small type at
the top rim of the page said HARRY RUSSELL and showed the area
code 602. Beneath that, he saw Mary’s handwriting: “He sent me this
sketch two weeks before he died. The house is still there. Paul never
tore it down. It survived the brewery and is all fixed up.”
The drawing was in Skippy’s style, as recognizable as Mary’s
penmanship. He had done it, it seemed, from memory: the narrow,
three-story brick house topped by its turret with two windows. Inside

one of them a candle burned; behind the other, on the sill, stood a
milk bottle. Below the sketch was a note from Tim to Mary:

Let him know that I was happy enough. Make it easy on him.
T.

Fuller returned to his desk with the paper, which he brushed once
with his hand, before putting it on a small stack of State Department
forms held down by a glass paperweight, inside of which a sprig of
cherry blossom floated. It had traveled with him for many years, from
one country to another, throughout a world grown unexpectedly, and
increasingly, free.

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS

Having more than once described the writing of historical fiction as
being a relief from the self, I was aware as I worked on Fellow
Travelers of venturing further than usual into my own life’s
preoccupations and fundamentals, however refracted they might be
here by time and geography. I have, while writing this book, felt
continually grateful to my parents, Arthur and Carol Mallon, and to
my teachers, especially George Doolittle, Fran Walker, Elmer
Blistein, and Robert Kiely.
Down the street from me in present-day Foggy Bottom, I must
thank Steve Trachtenberg, Bill Frawley, and Faye Moskowitz of
George Washington University, who contrived to keep the doors of
Gelman Library open to me when I left teaching at GWU for a stint in
the government. Most of this book was written in Gelman’s sixth-floor
reading room, after many hours with the microfilmed Washington
Evening Star a few stories below.
In obtaining and understanding transcripts of both the executive
sessions of the Senate Permanent Subcommittee on Investigations
and the open sessions of the Army–McCarthy hearings, I had the
help of Dick Baker and Don Ritchie, longtime historians of the U. S.
Senate, as well as Brian McLaughlin of the U.S. Senate Library. Sara
Schoo, reference librarian at the Department of State, was also
generous with her time. And thanks to Joe Mohr for a superbly
informative tour of the Old Post Office tower on Pennsylvania
Avenue.

Of the many dozens of histories and biographies I’ve consulted, I
would single out the special importance of David K. Johnson’s The
Lavender Scare: The Cold War Persecution of Gays and Lesbians in
the Federal Government (University of Chicago, 2004). Professor
Rick Ewig’s article on the life and death of Senator Lester Hunt was
helpful, as was the Web site of the History Office of the United States
Army in Europe (USAREUR). Also on the Web: Richard A.
Johnson’s recollections of basic training at Fort Dix.
I would like to thank Mel Levine, formerly of the U.S. State
Department, for advice about Hawkins Fuller’s career path, and my
friend Priscilla McMillan, whose writings and conversation have
illuminated my knowledge of the 1950s and much else. And I’m
grateful to Jim Steen for local Washington lore.
I hasten to point out—to those mentioned above and to the reader
—that I have taken my usual small liberties with historical fact, and
more than my usual license with historical figures.
My editor, Dan Frank, has again bolstered and challenged me in
all the ways I’ve tried not to take for granted in our long association.
He has my deepest gratitude. The enthusiasm shown toward this
project by Sloan Harris, my agent, has been both sustaining and
delightful.
Chris Bull has been my own proof of the axiom—and showtune
lyric—that if you become a teacher by your pupils you’ll be taught. In
two decades of argument about politics, sex, and culture, he has
usually outshone me in logic, and always in bravery.
I cannot imagine life in Washington without John McConnell, the
gold standard for public service and devoted friendship.
And I cannot imagine life anywhere without Bill Bodenschatz.

THOMAS MALLON

Washington, D.C.
November 13, 2006

ABOUT THE AUTHOR

Thomas Mallon is the author of seven novels, including Bandbox,
Henry and Clara, and Dewey Defeats Truman. Among his nonfiction
books are studies of diaries (A Book of One’s Own), plagiarism
(Stolen Words), and the Kennedy assassination (Mrs. Paine’s
Garage). A frequent contributor to The New Yorker, The Atlantic
Monthly, and other magazines, he lives in Washington, D.C.

BOOKS BY THOMAS MALLON
FICTION

Arts and Sciences
Aurora 7
Henry and Clara
Dewey Defeats Truman
Two Moons
Bandbox
Fellow Travelers
NONFICTION

Edmund Blunden
A Book of One’s Own
Stolen Words
Rockets and Rodeos
In Fact
Mrs. Paine’s Garage

This is a work of fiction. Names, characters, places, and incidents
either are the product of the author’s imagination or are used
fictitiously. Any resemblance to actual persons, living or dead,
events, or locales is entirely coincidental.

Copyright © 2007 by Thomas Mallon

All rights reserved. Published in the United States by Pantheon
Books, a division of Random House, Inc., New York, and in Canada
by Random House of Canada Limited, Toronto.

Pantheon Books and colophon are registered trademarks of Random
House, Inc.

Grateful acknowledgment is made to the following for permission to
reprint previously published material: Alfred Publishing Co., Inc.:
Excerpt from “Monotonous,” lyrics by June Carroll, music by Arthur
Siegel. Copyright © 1952 (Renewed) by Chappell & Co., Inc.;
excerpt from “No Love, No Nothin,’” lyrics by Leo Robin, music by
Harry Warren. Copyright © 1943 (Renewed) WB Music Corp. All
rights reserved. Reprinted by permission of Alfred Publishing Co.,
Inc. · Random House, Inc., and Faber and Faber Ltd.: Excerpt from
“The More Loving One,” from Collected Poems by W. H. Auden.
Copyright © 1957 by W. H. Auden. Reprinted by permission of
Random House, Inc., and Faber and Faber Ltd.

Library of Congress Cataloging-in-Publication Data
Mallon, Thomas, [1951–]
Fellow travelers / Thomas Mallon.
p. cm.
1. Nineteen fifties—Fiction. 2. Washington (D.C.)—Fiction. 3. United
States—Politics and government—1953–1961—Fiction. I. Title.
PS3563.A43157F45 2007

dc22

813'.54—
2006024586

www.pantheonbooks.com

eISBN: 978-0-375-42516-5
v3.0_r2

W at’s next on
your reading list?

Discover your next
great read!
Get personalized book picks and up-to-date news
about this author.
Sign up now.

