CHAPTER FOUR

October 6, 1953
The handful of observers at the back of Room 357 could see the
shoulders of the witness stiffen. Mr. Edward J. Lyons, Jr.,
representing the Judge Advocate General, gamely proceeded to
describe the frequency with which United Nations prisoners had
been “discovered with their hands tied behind their backs and their
eyes gouged out. They’d been used for bayonet practice and the
like.”
While still in charge in Korea, General MacArthur had been
determined to do things differently from the way they’d been done
during World War II. Rather than waiting for victory—or, as it
appeared to be turning out this time, negotiated stalemate—he’d
begun investigating North Korean atrocities as soon as anyone got
wind of them. The evidence of torture and brainwashing was plentiful
and compelling, and Senator Charles Potter (R-Michigan) appeared
to relish running this hearing that had been convened to discuss it.
McCarthy had not finished honeymooning down in Nassau, but the
atrocities task force of the Permanent Subcommittee on
Investigations was Potter’s responsibility, and he seemed
determined to make the most of it. There were no cameras or
reporters here at this closed executive session in the Senate Office
Building, and public hearings on the subject wouldn’t come until
December, but even so, Potter remained energetic—no matter that
the Democrats, who’d months ago quit the committee in protest of
McCarthy’s tactics, refused to come back even for this; no matter, in
fact, that Potter was the only senator, amidst several staff members,
to have shown up this morning. He still looked bent on getting to the
bottom of something awful.

For most of the grim testimony it was hard to remember that this
was the McCarthy committee. But there came a point, in the midst of
eliciting information from Lieutenant Colonel J. W. Whitehorne III,
when Potter made the mistake of thinking out loud: “I am curious
about the twenty-three Americans who are still over there, whom
apparently Communist propaganda got the best of. Or maybe they
went into the service as pro-Communists. Is there any check being
made as to the background of the men still there?”
Once Colonel Whitehorne declared that information on the
defectors was indeed available, Roy Cohn, as if hearing a whistle,
sprang from a midmorning slumber: “What was the answer on that?
Did any of those people have Communist backgrounds?”
“Some of them had leftist leanings,” said Colonel Whitehorne.
“Would we be able to get some documentation?” asked Cohn,
more in the imperative than the interrogative. All at once he was in
possession of the hearing, which now seemed, more familiarly, to be
concerning itself with domestic subversion.
Tim Laughlin had a much better view of Cohn than he had had at
McCarthy’s wedding last week. He wasn’t sure whether to take him
for a mobster or a boy wearing his first suit. The dark, hooded eyes;
the scar down the nose; the slicked-down hair—all these features
fought against the committee counsel’s improbable, extreme youth.
Twenty-six, Cecil Holland, back at the Star, had said.
Tim could see the concern that Cohn’s line of questioning had
provoked on the high, creased forehead of the army’s new counsel,
John Adams. But Tim was looking more closely at Potter, to whom
he might actually be talking once the hearing reached its conclusion.
Yesterday afternoon he’d called the senator’s office to confirm his
appointment and been told by the secretary that he might like to get
a glimpse of Potter in action before coming in for an interview.

With his horn-rim glasses and balding brow, he reminded Tim of
the lay teachers in math and science at St. Agnes’ Boys’ High. He
would have been surprised by Potter’s own youth if he hadn’t looked
him up in the Congressional Directory during his last afternoon at the
Star. Only thirty-six, and already in the upper body after three terms
in the House! In addition to his regular committee assignments, the
senator served on the Battle Monuments Commission, a fact that
somehow appealed to Tim, who last night had imagined getting the
job and making phone calls that would spruce up the cannon at Bull
Run or the statue of Father Duffy in Times Square.
But the crisp zeal Potter was again showing, now that Cohn had
subsided, had to do with far-more-distant battlefields that had barely
cooled. None of the POWs who’d been rescued or exchanged—in a
mental condition more frightening than their physical one—was
seated here this morning. Only the brass were at the witness table,
and it was painful enough hearing the descriptions of torture filtered
through them. Tim could only guess what the impact would be when
the victims themselves testified in a couple of months. Cecil Holland
had told him how McCarthy liked to perform a sleight of hand
between the committee’s executive and public sessions. When pink
witnesses who’d been subpoenaed to reveal their former Communist
ties showed any instinct to fight back during the closed session, they
most likely wouldn’t get called for the open hearing, where McCarthy
preferred to display the timid and guilty-looking. Things would
operate with a strange similarity in this case, Tim imagined. The
more shaky the repatriated prisoners, the more powerful Senator
Potter’s point would be.
All this activity felt reassuring to Tim. Whatever the committee’s
reported excesses, surely not even Miss McGrory, back at the Star,
could object to this particular inquiry. Only three days ago the pope
himself had called for new international laws against war crimes, and
two years before that, Tim had heard Father Beane, the visiting
priest from the Chinese missions, tell about what he and his brothers
had suffered at the hands of Mao’s advancing armies. Even now he

remembered the friar’s cadences and fervor, and how he himself had
sat in the Church of the Epiphany, between Frances and his mother,
thinking: Some “soldier of God” I am! That was, after all, what he
was supposed to have become on the spring Sunday in 1944 when
Bishop O’Neill confirmed him with a symbolic toughening slap to the
face.
But maybe here, in the smallest of ways, he could be helpful in the
fight against godlessness and cruelty. If he went to work for Potter,
he would not just be keeping Father Duffy laureled; he’d be affording
protection to Father Beane as well. It might be the only soldiering he
ever did. He’d never been able to think through what he’d do when
the draft board got around to calling him up. Do you have
homosexual tendencies? Check yes or no. When he’d registered,
almost four years ago in that little office up at Fordham, he’d realized
he was damned either way he answered: he could be an outcast or a
liar. He’d chosen to lie, rationalizing that “tendencies” could be
proved only by experience, and he’d certainly had none of that.
Homosexual tendencies: had Uncle Alan, his mother’s never-married
brother, kept them tucked away with his St. Christopher medal,
inside the backpack he’d carried onto Corregidor? Tim had often
wondered.
Potter was making ready to adjourn, telling the military men that
he’d be out on the West Coast later this month, doing some more
preliminary interviews. While he was away, he expected them to
keep getting ready for the open hearings in December. “We’re
working toward the same purpose,” he said, with midwestern nasality
and a smile. His gavel came down at 11:45 a.m.
Everywhere in the city one could feel that autumn—the season not
of death, Tim always thought, but of quickening—had finally arrived.
What Drew Pearson still called the “Washington Merry-Go-Round”
had, after a summer idling in the weeds, rattled to life, even without
McCarthy in town to flip the switch. Yesterday Governor Warren had

been sworn in as Chief Justice, while Nixon was embarking on a tenweek tour of Asia.
Potter stood up, with a wincing, unexpected slowness, and came
out from behind the committee dais. How large his head seemed in
proportion to the rest of his body, Tim thought, before noticing what
was seriously wrong. An aide had handed the senator two canes.
From the stiffness of his gait, Tim realized that the man was walking
on artificial legs—not the sort of fact that went into the tabular pages
of the Congressional Directory.
And yet, all at once this fact seemed more joking than somber.
Each cane had a little electric flashlight near its top, and Potter was
now playfully using one of them to signal a man three seats away
from Tim.
That man—small and gray and grudgingly groomed, with a thin
face somewhere between mottled and ravaged—returned Potter’s
smile. He then got up to leave the back row, nodding genially to Tim.
“Excuse me,” said Tim, before the man could depart, “do you know
where Room 80 is? I tried to locate it on my way here. I’ve got an
appointment there in—”
“That’s number 80 in the Capitol, son. Not here in the SOB. In fact,
Charlie’s the only s.o.b. not housed with the other ninety-five s.o.b.s
here in the SOB.”
“I have a job interview with him. With Senator Potter, I mean.”
“Well, come with me, young sir. I’m heading there now.”
They trotted down the stairs to the subway that ran between the
two buildings. The older man explained how the senator had his
office in the Capitol to make his handicap less of an inconvenience.
“Of course it’s not so damned convenient when the committee
meeting is here instead of there, but it helps more often than not.”

Tim could smell a peppermint on the man’s breath and wondered if
it was there to mask a morning shot of Four Roses. He could easily
imagine the two of them saying hello on Ninth Avenue, the older man
having emerged from McNaughton’s saloon to slap him on the back
with best wishes “for that fine woman, your Grandma Gaffney,” who
would decline the wishes with a lace-curtain shudder once Timmy
brought them to her kitchen.
The man ushered him to a wicker seat on the jammed little
subway. Tim could see Potter in the car ahead as the two-car train
started down the monorail. While it moved, the man continued
talking in a rat-a-tat-tat like Winchell’s. “It was a land mine that did it,”
he explained. “January 31, 1945, Battle of the Bulge, in the Colmar
Pocket. No choice but to amputate both his pins. Spent a year in
Walter Reed and had to learn to walk all over again. Fella who’d
once been a high jumper!”
Tim nodded gravely in the darkness.
“The VA calls him ‘permanently and totally disabled’!” cried the
man, cackling over the clatter. “Well, it doesn’t keep him from voting
on their budget.”
“What are the lights on the canes for?” asked Tim.
“Hailing cabs.” The man paused for a moment. “Well, we’ll soon
see how ‘abled’ Charlie turns out to be among this crowd he’s in with
now.” He pointed to one of the heads in the lead car. “See our boy
Roy up there?”
“Yes,” said Tim. They had reached the end of the Lilliputian tunnel,
and he could make out the back of Cohn’s freshly cropped skull.
“Don’t use the men’s toilet when he’s around, if you catch my drift.
Though he tends to be enchanted by fellows a little huskier than
yourself.” The man laughed as the train bucked to a stop.

“Are you on Senator Potter’s staff?” asked Tim.
“No,” the man answered, chuckling, as he and Tim made their way
to the Capitol’s first floor. “Let’s just say I’m authorized to help him
out a bit from time to time. Him and some of the other Michigan GOP
men. My name’s McIntyre, Thomas McIntyre. Call me Tommy. Was a
newspaperman for several eternities, down here and up in Detroit.”
Tim shook hands and introduced himself, trying to understand
what this slight, fast-moving man meant by helping the senator out,
and wondering who had authorized him to do it.
“Potter’s a good-enough egg,” said McIntyre, the heels of his
unshined shoes beating a fast rhythm across the marble corridor.
“He’s managed to vote for foreign aid but not forget it’s the
automakers who sent him here. You know,” he continued, almost
reflective, “he ought to be an interesting fellow. He was actually a
social worker before he went off to the war. But he’s got one
handicap worse than no legs.”
“Really?” asked Tim, as McIntyre knocked on the door of Room
80.
“Yeah. A permanent charley horse between his ears!”
McIntyre was still laughing when the door to the senator’s office
was opened—by a man with one arm.
“His driver,” whispered Tommy. “No foolin’!”
Miss Antoinette Cook, the woman Tim had spoken with on the
phone, introduced him to Robert L. Jones, a still-young man who
looked as if he might be Potter’s executive assistant, and whose
speech carried the salt of a Maine accent. “Oh, yes, Mr. Laughlin,”
he said, appearing less than pleased by Tim’s arrival, let alone
McIntyre’s. “The fellow that Hawkins Fuller recommended when he
was up here to defend State’s latest excessive appropriation.”

McIntyre looked at Tim with an encouraging smile, and then alarm.
“Jesus, kid, your face has gone white. It’s only a job interview. This
ain’t the Depression.”
Hawkins Fuller.
Tim managed to nod and shake Mr. Jones’s hand, while McIntyre
cheerfully took charge of the situation. “Put him to work, Jones. See
what he can do. Better yet, see if he can do the bit of work I was
going to do for you today. Here, son, this is a copy of what
Knowland’s planning to say on the floor a couple of hours from now. I
got it from his press man. It’s no different from what he said at his
press conference yesterday, but it’s a couple of decibels higher, and
it’s going to make a splash. So why don’t you sit down at one of the
Underwoods here and write a couple of paragraphs that Charlie can
say in support of it?”
Mr. Jones had already lost interest in Timothy Laughlin; he was on
a phone behind Miss Cook, cupping his hand over the receiver.
“Go on, read it, read it,” said Tommy McIntyre, as he wheeled a
typist’s chair into position behind Tim.
Senator Knowland, the majority leader, had come home from his
world tour the other day and learned of Adlai Stevenson’s call for a
nonaggression pact with the Russians—a proposal that had irritated
the California senator to an extreme degree. “Now watch the
Koreans drag out the Panmunjom talks,” he was warning. “This will
be one more sign that we need to put our house in order and our
rifles at the ready. Time is not on the side of the Free World, and we
don’t need Mr. Stevenson, after his massive repudiation at the polls,
recommending that we play at useless diplomacy.”
Tim had only a slight idea of how Potter spoke, but he was pretty
sure the point of this writing assignment was to make him sound as
implacable as Knowland. So he took up a yellow pad and made
several notes for a few paragraphs of oratory. To begin with,

Knowland must be extolled. To continue, Stevenson must be
excoriated, for his attempt “not only to bend over backwards, but to
roll out the red carpet for our adversaries of that same color.” The
prose began to flow almost automatically. The defeated Democrat
was proposing “a nonaggression pact with a flagrant aggressor.” To
conclude, one needed to take a shot at India, a sentimental favorite
of liberals, which Knowland had accused of backing the North
Korean position before the peace talks had even gotten underway.
“In my great automobile-making state,” wrote Tim as Potter, “we’re
wary of any car or country that stays in ‘neutral’ for too long. ‘Neutral’
is what you’re in when you roll downhill.”
After penciling in a few revisions, Tim rolled a sheet of paper into
the Underwood and typed up this stentorian boilerplate. Struck by his
own speed, he realized how the words—for all that he believed
them, and he more or less did—seemed to be coming from neither
Potter’s brain nor his own. He was speaking in another voice entirely
—the way, as an altar boy during Mass, he would be saying his Latin
part while still hearing the English words of whatever hymn had
soared through the church a few minutes before. He proofread the
little speech a second time, to make sure he hadn’t typed the words
“Hawkins Fuller” somewhere in the middle of one of its sentences.
Then he handed the page to Mr. McIntyre.
“Fast fella, aren’t you?” the lined little man said with a grin, before
carrying the speech to the suite’s innermost office. Before five
minutes passed, he reemerged, in the company of Senator Potter
and a third man. All of them, carrying their hats, headed toward Tim.
“Another Irish wordsmith!” enthused the senator, who put both his
canes in his left hand, so that his right could extend itself to Tim.
“Welcome to the staff, Mr. Laughlin.”
Tim shook Potter’s hand and realized with embarrassment that he
had been looking down at the senator’s feet.

Potter seemed pleased by the
awkwardness he encountered daily.

chance

to

alleviate

an

“I was just telling Mr. Jeffreys, my Lansing constituent here, that
I’m looking forward to some duck hunting on the Upper Peninsula
this winter. These days I’m able to glide around in some paper-thin
galoshes my wife gave me, while my pals have to clomp and sweat
in boots that weigh a ton. ‘Aren’t your feet cold?’ one of them asked
me last year. ‘Not exactly!’ I told him. ‘Unless they’re feeling chilly
wherever I left ’em in France!’” He paused to laugh. “Everything’s got
its advantages.”
Tim smiled, more in awe than humor. Potter clapped him on the
shoulder and continued on out with McIntyre and Mr. Jeffreys. Miss
Cook then presented him with two forms to be filled out. “You can
bring these back with you when you start Monday morning, Mr.
Laughlin.”
Tim thanked her and everybody else still in the office. A minute or
so later, halfway down the Capitol’s east steps, he paused to sit
beside a huge stone pediment supporting an ornate lamppost. He
closed his eyes and shook off the image of Potter’s severed feet, lost
somewhere in the soil of France. It wasn’t hard to banish the picture;
his mind had no room for it, or even for the fact that he could now
pay the rent and write home with some good news. His mind was
filled with the afternoon of McCarthy’s wedding, exactly a week ago.
An hour after getting off the streetcar, he’d been summoned to a
telephone on the other side of the city room. “A call from Capitol Hill,”
he’d been told. Through the receiver had come the voice he’d heard
an hour before and never expected to hear again: “Send your
résumé and a letter of application to the attention of Miss Antoinette
Cook. The job is a junior assistant with writing duties.”
Dumbfounded, Tim had written down the address and phone
number for Potter’s office. “Thank you,” he’d managed to say.

“If you get the job, treat yourself to a glass of chocolate milk.”
And with that the still-nameless voice had left the line.
Hawkins Fuller.
Now, a week later, Tim sat for another moment on the steps,
before he opened his eyes to see a flag being run up one of the
distant poles on the Capitol’s roof. It was a familiar sight: he knew
that this flag would wave for only a moment before being lowered
and shipped to some elementary school in Cheyenne or Mill Valley,
where the teachers could tell the students it had flown over the U.S.
Capitol. But for the few seconds it was aloft, filled with what might be
two new separate futures, Tim looked at it with his hand over his
heart.

October 6, 1953
Dear Rep. Fish:
You may assure your Dutch-American constituent in
Wappingers Falls that the Department of State views all recent
violence in Indonesia with the greatest possible concern. As
Secretary Dulles remarked on…
Mary Johnson proofread her letter to the New York congressman
and sank into the feeling of futility that often overcame her by
midafternoon. What could any of these well-meant epistolary
stitchings and swabbings really do to treat the wounds of the tortured
world? There was news this week that Lockheed had begun work on
a nuclear-powered airplane; no doubt it would be carrying an atomic
bomb as well.
Behind Mary, Miss Lightfoot was speaking to Beverly Phillips
about the woman in the Office of Legal Advisors who’d just won a

four-thousand-dollar car in WMAL’s “Mystery Voice” contest.
“Well,” said Mrs. Phillips, “she won’t have any trouble making her
Community Chest contribution.”
Mary laughed. Underneath the correspondence piling up for the
bureau chief’s signature lay her copy of the memo from R. W. Scott
McLeod, security officer to 1,142 employees, informing all of them
that if they chose not to make a Community Chest contribution this
year, they must report to his office for an interview. Secretary Dulles
was chairman of the department’s drive, and McLeod’s zeal to show
the boss what a little extra aggression could accomplish had sparked
much grumbling about the “Conformity Chest.”
“There’s nothing wrong with what McLeod is doing,” said Miss
Lightfoot, in her near-chronic tone of irritation. “He’s just trying for
one-hundred-percent participation. He’ll lend you a dollar if you can’t
contribute one on your own.”
Mary turned her small swivel chair so that she and Beverly Phillips
could each raise an eyebrow to the other. Miss Lightfoot also found
nothing wrong with McLeod’s unceasing security-risk investigations.
Indeed, she seemed disappointed with the estimate that his review
of things wouldn’t reach Congressional Relations until December.
A young man carrying a book now came through the door,
confusing Mary, who took him for the summer office boy from
Eastern European Affairs. Hadn’t he returned to school?
“Is Mr. Fuller in?” the boy asked. He stammered over the “F” in
Fuller. “I couldn’t find him on the wall directory, but the man at the
front desk told me to come here.”
Mary smiled. She realized that this wasn’t the boy from EEA,
though he did look a little like the lovesick Donald O’Connor in Call
Me Madam, the only musical anyone would ever care to make about
this place. And then it occurred to her. This skinny fellow was

lovesick. She looked at him gently, filling up with annoyance toward
Fuller as she did so. What new recklessness of his had made this
boy venture here with a handful of pebbles to throw at Romeo’s
window?
“I’m afraid he left early. To go to the Georgetown library, I believe.”
“The library at George Washington U.,” Miss Lightfoot corrected.
“Thank you,” said Mary. Her colleague, already matronly though
no more than thirty-five, certainly kept track of Fuller.
“Will he be back?” the young man asked.
“I doubt it,” said Mary.
Managing not to stammer, the boy said, “I was bringing him this.”
He handed Mary a new biography of the elder Henry Cabot Lodge. A
receipt from Trover’s bookshop stuck out of it. An odd present to
bring here, thought Mary, Lodge not exactly having been an
internationalist. But it was a big and serious book—impressive, the
boy had probably reasoned—and he had spent six dollars on it.
“You could leave it here,” she said. “I’ll see that Mr. Fuller gets it.”
The boy still looked crestfallen.
“You can leave a note, too,” Mary added. “So he’ll be sure to know
who it’s from.”
“I’ll write one inside the book,” the young man declared, looking
more hopeful.
Mary pointed to the empty chair at the side of her desk and
watched him fumble for his ballpoint pen. His handwriting was so
neat she could read it upside down without the least effort.

With thanks to Hawkins Fuller
(I got the job. You’re wonderful.)
Timothy Laughlin
“Does he know where to reach you?” asked Mary, trying to sound
casual instead of confidential. “Is there a number you’d like to
leave?”
“I’m not on the phone,” said Timothy Laughlin. A cloud rushed over
the map of Ireland that was his face—mortification, Mary thought, at
having used such a tenement archaism. “But I’ll put my address with
it,” he added, recovering enough equilibrium to accept the index card
that Mary gave him to write it on. He also removed the bookshop
receipt, and asked if she could direct him back to the Twenty-first
Street entrance.
After he’d gone, she prepared the envelope for another soothing
letter, to Congressman Ikard of Texas. Adjusting her typewriter’s left
margin, she noticed Miss Lightfoot smoothing her strawberry-blond
permanent wave, and realized what close attention the woman had
paid to the boy’s visit.
