
CHAPTER TWO

September 28, 1953
“Ready?” asked Hawkins Fuller, as soon as Mary Johnson entered
his office.
“Ready,” she replied, noting the gray-striped pants as he swung
his feet off his desk. “But aren’t you overdoing things?” Sporting a
version of the foreign service’s traditional trousers seemed ridiculous
here in the State Department’s boxy modern building in Foggy
Bottom.
Fuller was unpersuaded. “It’s true that we’re civil servants, Miss
Johnson, but our FSOs are supposed to wear gray-striped trousers
for daylight calls. The reception to which we’re heading constitutes a
diplomatic assignment. It is now six-twenty; the reception begins at
six-thirty; and sunset is not until six-fifty-five.” He flashed his smile,
put on his hat, and offered her his arm. “Just paying tribute to
custom.”
Out on Twenty-first Street, while they waited for a taxi, Mary
reflected that on an actual foreign service officer the overcorrect
pants would appear a clumsy attempt to get ahead. On Fuller they
provided an opportunity to slow his own advance, to stay where he
was through the prankish means of going by somebody else’s book.
A man in the Bureau of Far Eastern Affairs who’d known him when
they were boys at St. Paul’s had told Mary the other day: “Hawk
could have been a real track star, but for the small matter that he
could never see the point in outrunning anybody. Pretty odd for a
sixteen-year-old.”

Fuller held the cab door while she scooped up the edge of the skirt
she’d shortened on her Singer last night.
“That new?” he asked.
“It’s so old it was once New Look, which in case you didn’t know is
as dead as the New Deal. I miss both.”
“Really?” was all Fuller replied.
Mary knew that she wouldn’t have to elaborate on her feelings
about FDR. She had never met a man, here at the job or elsewhere,
more indifferent to politics than Hawkins Fuller. As for the New Look,
she wasn’t going to tell him she missed its long skirts because her
legs were too skinny.
The driver, looking toward the orange glow over the Potomac, had
begun to thrum his fingers on the steering wheel. “Where exactly are
we going?” asked Fuller.
“Twenty-six twenty-two Sixteenth Street,” said Mary, giving the
address of the Lithuanian legation.
“I don’t suppose it has a sign,” said Fuller.
“I’m not even sure it has a telephone.”
The driver pulled away.
“Well,” said Fuller, “you’re a sport to be my girl for the night. I’ll
take you to dinner after we sample whatever funny food they’re
serving.”
Poor plump Miss Lightfoot, who had the desk next to Mary’s, had
been mad with envy when she’d heard about the invitation. Women
in the building, including the married ones, generally went straight to
the department’s Biographic Register after their first sight of Hawkins

Fuller. She’d done it herself, finding out that he’d been born in ’25 to
a businessman father (also St. Paul’s); had performed some minor
naval heroics at the end of the war; then finished Harvard in ’50, just
after his twenty-fifth birthday. Before coming to the department he’d
spent one year working for a branch of his father’s firm in Asunción
and another on a Fulbright in Oslo.
Now he served with Mary in the department’s Bureau of
Congressional Relations. Their boss, Thruston Morton, an
internationally minded Republican who’d once been in Congress
himself, wanted Fuller at tonight’s reception to help convince a
particular congressman on HUAC that State really was serious about
the captive Baltic republics and that a more aggressive approach
could be expected from the still-new administration.
Mary liked Fuller, but experience and instinct left her immune to
the swoonings of Miss Lightfoot and the rest of the distaff staff.
Growing up in New Orleans, she’d seen any number of men, a few
almost as handsome as he, making their solitary excursions into
special precincts of the Quarter. She couldn’t say she’d been
surprised to learn from the Biographic Register that Fuller had
arrived in Washington without a Norwegian wife.
She felt pretty sure he had done some checking on her, too. Fuller
probably knew that she had, more or less, a boyfriend, and that this
romance of hers with a doctor at Columbia Women’s was, for Fuller’s
own purposes, at just the right state of intensity: not so hot that Mary
couldn’t accept someone else’s invitation; not so cold that she’d be
expecting a second date with Hawkins Fuller.
“Nice-enough house,” he said, as the taxi reached the legation.
“But not exactly the Pan-American Union building.” Tomorrow night
Secretary Dulles would be giving a dinner there for the Panamanian
president—a tougher ticket than one to this party being held by the
Estonian government-in-exile, an institution so small it had had to
borrow the Lithuanian exiles’ premises.

Mr. Johannes Kaiv, consul general at the outpost the Estonians
were able to maintain in Rockefeller Center, greeted Mary and Fuller
at the door. An assistant named Miss Horm ushered them into a
parlor, pointing, as she led the Americans through a hallway, to the
portrait of “our President Rei,” presumably hung this afternoon and
on its way back to Rockefeller Center tomorrow morning. “He was
first elected to that office in 1928,” Miss Horm told the guests, with a
bittersweet smile. Fuller interrupted her recitation of all the posts Rei
had held before and since to ask, “Is he here?”
“Oh, no,” answered Miss Horm. “He is in Sweden.”
“A disappointment,” said Fuller.
“Do not believe the reports of his death,” said Miss Horm, in a
lower voice. “These rumors are spread all the time.”
“I’m confused,” Fuller whispered to Mary, once Miss Horm took
leave of them. “Didn’t the Swedes once conquer the Estonians? Are
they now buddies?”
“Sorry, I never took the foreign service exam, either. In three years
I’ve gone from being a secretary in the Passport Office to being more
or less a secretary to the assistant to the Assistant Secretary for
Congressional Relations.” She had been in this new post, a few feet
from Fuller’s own office, for three weeks. “It hasn’t been a meteoric
rise.”
Fuller looked to see if the complaint was serious, and her smile
told him that it wasn’t. Mary had come to Washington once she
graduated from Sophie Newcomb and her daddy, an honest lawyer
on Poydras Street who’d kept his head down during all of Huey
Long, got a congressman friend to get her the job. With her striking
thinness and very black hair she still looked more like the sort of
coed who went to Paris than the kind who became a government
girl.

The little cocktail crowd surrounding her and Fuller consisted, she
soon understood, of a few exiles and a good many more highachieving Estonian-Americans. The department, for all she knew,
had an acronym for the latter, HAEAs. A series of quick introductions
revealed the ones here to include a Maryland state legislator and a
national officer of the VFW.
Fuller had found a seat on a couch and was now tugging at her
navy-blue skirt, urging her to join him.
“We’re supposed to circulate,” she replied.
“Take a load off, Miss Johnson.” He tugged a little harder, until she
sat down. He was already bored, she could see, but confident—as
he had no doubt been his whole life—that people would be coming
to him, wherever he sat. Yes, the reluctant track star: Why run the
race when you’ve already won it?
And come people did, like the wife of a Standard Oil man, who told
Fuller and Mary that the plundered oil shale of Estonia was now
helping to run the Soviet army occupying that little country. The
woman was glad to be here, “showing the flag” with her husband,
who believed in “keeping his hand in.” However unlikely the Baltics’
liberation might be, “you have to have faith,” she told Fuller.
“There’s an optimist,” he said to Mary, once the woman was gone.
“I’m guessing there’s more Esso than Estonian in the husband’s
veins.”
“Well, it is faith of a kind,” Mary countered, less inspired by the
woman’s display of it than she was wearied by Fuller’s insouciance.
“Would you be as mocking if the faith at issue were the religious
kind? The kind Dulles worries we’re losing?”
“I would never mock John Foster Dulles,” said Fuller. “My father’s
colleague on the board of the American Bank Note Company?”

Mary sighed. He hadn’t, of course, answered the question, which
had been about the secretary’s sense that faith was losing its power
to motivate America in the world. Declining to press the point, she
settled for saying: “I miss Acheson.”
“Are you always so awash in nostalgia, Miss Johnson? The New
Deal? Long skirts? Retired cabinet secretaries?”
“I’ve got nothing much against the current one. But I do sometimes
feel like part of the typing pool inside a big Presbyterian parsonage.
With Acheson you knew you were working for a diplomat.” On his
last day, eight months ago, she had joined the long line of
employees walking through the chief’s office to shake his courtly
hand: Thank you for your good wishes, my dear young lady.
“Never met the man,” said Fuller. “At least this time only the boss’
brother has a mustache.” Acheson’s had been a bit reddish. Allen
Dulles—who ran the CIA while his sibling, Foster, ran State—had a
more or less white one. “I can’t imagine growing one myself,” Fuller
continued. “Or would you like me to, Miss Johnson? Do you desire
my advancement?”
“No,” Mary answered. “All I want is that you save me from this.” A
burly man of about forty, carrying two fish-topped crackers, was
moving toward her at considerable speed. An honest-to-God
Estonian, she surmised. Before Fuller could act, however, the
gentleman introduced himself as Fred Bell, born on the Lower East
Side to immigrant parents, but completely American himself, down to
his changed name. A veteran of D-Day who now owned three shoe
factories in Massachusetts. Even so, he was part of an exiles’
committee, and nothing in the world could have made him miss the
opportunity to come down here and say something about the
situation.
“Miss Horm back there told me you were with the State
Department, ma’am. Fifty thousand deportations since the takeover.

Including my cousin, just a peasant, who these days has to work on
a Russian collective. My other cousin over there’s a musician. The
oboe. He gets to stay in Tallinn and play bad music.”
“Why did they deport the peasant?” Mary asked, feeling foolish
using the word.
“Because the peasants resist collectivization. Estonians are
natural businessmen, ma’am. Very independent. You know, my
relatives used to vote. Now they’re impoverished and relocated, or
just gone.” In his anxiety to make the most of the few moments he
imagined he was having in the presence of officialdom, Mr. Bell ate
both of the hors d’oeuvres he had carried across the room. His eyes,
Mary noticed, were watering. “We’re a colony. Stripped of our
machinery, forced to feed them with our crops. Did you know you
used to be able to get eggs from Estonia in New York City? So good
they were exported all that way! What we need is a general strike,
something that with a little encouragement from abroad might spread
to the railway workers in Russia. If they went out, there’s no telling
how soon the whole system might collapse!”
Mary looked at him, apologetically. Despite the supposedly tough
new policy that had dispatched her and Fuller to this party, they were
still required, she knew, to speak the department’s soothing
Esperanto of noncommittal clucks and nods. She found herself
urging Mr. Bell to contact the Office of Eastern European Affairs with
his views—but then she couldn’t remember the name of the
Assistant Secretary for that particular bureau.
She turned to her companion, who’d been busy talking to a retired
languages professor. Fuller saw, and misinterpreted, her desire for
assistance.
“You’re right,” he said, rising. “We’ve got to go. Don’t know how I
lost track of the time. Tere!” he said to Mr. Bell, giving him his card
and propelling Mary toward the door.

“See what I learned?” he asked. “It means ‘Pleased to meet you.’”
“Actually, what I wanted—”
“I suppose ‘Next year in Tallinn’ would have been better, but for
just a few minutes’ work with the languages prof, ‘tere’ isn’t so bad.”
Mary turned around and saw Mr. Bell, half ancient mariner and half
modern PR man, already importuning someone else.
“Let’s get out of here,” said Fuller. “There’s no sign of
Congressman HUAC, in any case.”
“We can’t decently leave yet.”
But Mary saw that they couldn’t accomplish anything, either. A few
minutes later—so soon after sunset that Fuller’s trousers remained
almost appropriate—the two of them were back out on Sixteenth
Street. He put his arm around her waist as they began walking
south. “What are you in the mood for?”
“Scrambled eggs, by my lonesome, at home.” Mary could only
imagine what Miss Lightfoot would say to her turning down dinner
with Hawkins Fuller.
“Well, there’s something to be said for an early night,” he
observed.
“Do you have them?” she asked. “Early nights?”
“Tonight I will,” he answered. “I’m having lunch tomorrow at the
Harvard Club with my mother’s childless brother. Have to look sharp.
I need to stay in his good graces.”
Mary looked at him, but for a moment said nothing further.
“The pants are one thing,” he declared. “But you don’t think I
bought these shoes on my salary, do you? Or that I want his winter

place in New Mexico to go to one of my sisters?”
“How about other nights? Early or late?”
Fuller just smiled, and clasped her waist a little tighter. “What do
you put on your eggs, Miss Johnson? Ketchup?”
He was not, she knew, doubling back to attempt a forward pass;
he had no intention of pursuing an invitation to her place, though she
now recalled the almost pro forma advance he’d made in the
cafeteria two weeks ago, on her third day in Congressional
Relations. He’d been pleased, she thought, when it was blocked.
Had she said yes, he would probably have followed through, happily
enough—all the way from third base to home if she’d let him—but
she had allowed him, she felt sure, to return to more ardent matters
elsewhere.
“Cayenne pepper” was all she replied.
Fuller pretended to wince. “Ah, of course. New Orleans. All right,
spitfire. Let me find you a taxi.” Cabs would be thin on the ground
until they reached New Hampshire Avenue. “Too bad we can’t
share,” said Fuller. “But not all of us can live on the Georgetown
reaches of P Street. What are you, maybe two blocks from your old
friend Acheson?”
Mary, who still probably received more money from her father than
Fuller got from his uncle, said, “So I’m not the only one who reads
the Biographic Register.”
“Knowledge is power,” said Fuller. “Then you know I have a
modest one-bedroom on I Street. Just blocks from the office, really.
Makes the boss think I can’t bear being too far away from my work.”
And makes it easier, thought Mary, for you to arrive, after a late
night, in a rumpled rush—as you often do, putting Miss Lightfoot into
an even deeper swoon. She felt her attitude toward Fuller becoming,

for a moment, almost sisterly. “Do you know,” she asked, as they
kept searching for a cab, “that McLeod is supposed to start doing
interviews in our own little precinct before New Year’s?” Scott
McLeod, the new administration’s security man, with his
“Miscellaneous M Unit,” was hunting through the ranks for moral
turpitude of any kind, but one kind in particular, the kind that still got
the men of the foreign service mocked as “cookie-pushers” whose
striped pants might as well be aprons.
She had tried to ask the question as if it were merely a piece of
office gossip, some water-cooler topic on the order of McCarthy’s
wedding.
“I came in as a certified paragon, Miss Johnson. Letters of
recommendation from Cordell Hull and both Dulleses. Never let it be
said that the Fuller family doesn’t touch all bases.”
She should respond, of course, that she hadn’t been talking about
him, only the morale of the division; but before she could get that
falsehood out, he had flagged down a cab. “You take it,” he said with
a grin. “I’ll get the next one.” He opened the door and made sure her
skirt didn’t get caught. “There. Much easier, I’m sure, than when you
were taking the New Look to such lengths. I’ll see you tomorrow,
Miss Johnson.”
She waved, and watched him pass up another available cab. He
continued along Sixteenth Street, toward downtown, instead of
turning onto New Hampshire, which would have taken him to his
apartment.
