
CHAPTER THREE

September 29, 1953
“Our Holy Father cordially imparts to Joseph R. McCarthy and Jean
Kerr on the occasion of their marriage his paternal apostolic
blessing.”
When the priest finished reading the pope’s official good wishes to
Senator McCarthy and his bride—a pièce de résistance with which to
end the ceremony—the crowd’s appreciative murmur turned into
applause. A second later, the organist struck the first note of the
recessional and the congregation snapped to its feet for the newly
married couple’s walk back up the aisle.
Joe and Jean—as even Timothy Laughlin couldn’t help but think of
them at this moment—turned from facing the huge mosaics behind
the altar and began their march to the cathedral’s doors. Standing
near the back of the church, Tim would have to settle for imagining
the McCarthys’ smiles until they were much farther along in their exit.
In the meantime he gazed at the huge red-and-white marble pillars
that seemed to be running with blood, and put a quarter into the
poorbox: he’d taken the extra coin from his dresser when he left this
morning, forgetting that, even if there was a full Mass with the
wedding, there wouldn’t be a collection.
He had just counted the twenty-four windows in the cathedral’s
dome, recording the figure in his Palmer-method hand on a page of
his steno pad that included the following notes:
Mrs. Nixon next to Dulles (Allen, CIA not State)
Jack Dempsey! (TELL DAD)

Wilbur Johnson—family friend (Kerrs), brought bride to church
Roy Cohen—McC committee counsel, one of ushers
As soon as the bride and groom were out the door, Tim managed
to leave the cathedral by a side exit, ahead of most of the crowd. On
the church steps he was supposed to pass his notes to Miss Beale’s
assistant. The wedding itself would make it into this afternoon’s
paper, but coverage of the reception would have to wait until
tomorrow’s. He wouldn’t need to deliver his notes on that part of
things until the end of work today.
Finding a place on the steps behind several reporters, Tim tried on
the feeling of being one of them. It was a bad fit, several sizes too
big. All the newsmen seemed full of knowingness, and none of them
was giving his dislike of McCarthy a day off. Eisenhower’s absence
—the president had claimed a conflict with the Panamanian leader’s
visit—was the subject of a few satisfied jokes before the reporters
quieted down to get a quote from Nixon, who was pausing briefly
during his descent of the church steps.
“A beautiful ceremony,” said the vice president, slowly enough for
any pencils still competing with microphones. “The bride was lovely,
but then I’ve never met a bride who wasn’t!” He snapped off a grin
and quickly escorted Mrs. Nixon to the car.
“Did he just insult Joe’s wife?” wondered a man from the Baltimore
Sun. There was, Tim thought, something a little off about Nixon’s
effortful remark, part of the awkwardness you could feel all over the
cathedral steps. “Kiss her, Joe!” the folks on the sidewalk kept
shouting. But the senator wouldn’t comply, and his expression
continued to undergo the oddest alternations. For ten seconds at a
time he’d look like one of Tim’s Irish uncles, the smile ready to issue
a song, but then some saturnine cloud would scud across the eyes
and mouth, turning McCarthy into a baleful, preoccupied spectator at
his own nuptials.

“He looks like he’s ready to push some cookies himself,” said one
of the reporters, pointing to the gray-striped pants beneath
McCarthy’s morning coat.
“Did you know that Torquemada got her to convert for this?” his
colleague asked. “The girl was a Presbyterian.”
Tim scanned the faces in the crowd filling up a whole block of
Rhode Island Avenue. Most of them were women, and the mood
was cheerful, but here and there he could spot someone glaring up
at the groom, displaying a resentment either abstract or deeply
particular. These angry exceptions only added to the off-kilter feel of
the whole event.
Once he’d handed off his notes, Tim hotfooted it two blocks to the
Washington Club in Dupont Circle, where guests waiting to be let
into the reception were sweltering alongside another crowd of
gawkers. Twenty minutes passed before he could get inside this
grand old building to make notes on the white chrysanthemums and
blocks of orange ice in the bowl of nonalcoholic punch. He got as
close as he could to the receiving line. If he were more aggressive,
let alone taller, he might have secured a better vantage point, but
even at some distance he could pick up most of what the politicians
were saying in their overloud voices. Senator Hickenlooper was
there—he recognized him from the Congressional Directory—along
with Teddy Roosevelt’s daughter, Mrs. Longworth, and a
Congressman Bentley from Michigan, identified with the help of a
Detroit News reporter. Between jottings Tim got further glimpses of
McCarthy himself, who he suspected (from long observation of his
male relatives) had just managed to get hold of something more
fortifying than the punch. But the drink had not resolved the
alternations in his facial expression; it was speeding them up.
“Had to settle for wearing this!” cried Joseph P. Kennedy, tugging
at the lapels of his dark business suit. “My own cutaway’s not back
from the cleaners.” This was understood, to general laughter, as a

reference to his son Jack’s wedding, less than three weeks ago, to
Miss Bouvier, the Times-Herald’s inquiring photographer. There
might be no sign of Senator Kennedy here this morning, but three of
his brothers and sisters were right behind the old ambassador.
Tim kept at it until 2:05, through the bride’s vigorous toss of her
bouquet—“That gal can play on my team anytime!” someone roared
—and the newlyweds’ departure in a black limousine, not the red
Cadillac rumored to be a wedding present from some of the
senator’s Texas supporters. Back out in Dupont Circle Tim soon felt
himself sweating through his blue suit. His steno pad was already
soaked from his own palm; thank God, at least, for ballpoint pens.
Looking at the top page of his notes, he realized he would soon be
mystified by his own abbreviations unless he made a fair copy, with
amplifications, right away. So once he’d bought a half-pint of milk at
the big Peoples drugstore, he sat down amidst the late lunchers and
sun-catchers on a bench near the Circle’s western rim. Across the
expanse of grass he could hear the last of the wedding guests
laughing through their departures.
He had just finished transcribing the first page on the pad when he
noticed a shadow approaching: someone also wanting to sit down.
As quickly as he could, he cleared off his milk carton, napkin, and
two loose steno pages from the rest of the bench. “Sorry,” he said,
before he’d even had a chance to look up.
“For what?”
For everything, thought Tim, once he raised his head and saw the
spectacular young man standing over him. Taking in the suit jacket
slung over the man’s broad shoulders and the faint glistening of
sweat in the hollow of his neck where he’d loosened his tie, Tim
wanted to say: For being nothing like you. For being all you’ll have
for company on this bench.
“May I?” said the man.

“Of course,” Tim finally answered.
“Don’t they give you an office?”
Tim laughed. “They’re not even giving me a job past Friday.” And
then it all came out in a nervous, mortifying rush: his graduation from
Fordham; his arrival here in June; his summer of rewrites on the
Star’s city desk; his hope for a job on Capitol Hill; the chance to
cover McCarthy’s wedding.
Realizing that the man’s suit was as fine as his physique, Tim
asked: “You weren’t a guest there, were you?”
It was the most foolish question he could have posed; if this man
had been inside the Washington Club, or even the cathedral, Tim
would certainly have noticed.
“No,” said the man, pointing in the direction of New Hampshire
Avenue. “I was having lunch with my uncle at the Harvard Club.”
Tim nodded.
“So who was there from the State Department?” the man asked.
“Come on: name names, as the groom might say.”
Tim flipped through the pages of his pad, as cooperatively as if
he’d actually been asked to do this in the witness chair. Searching
for a relevant name, he mocked his own parochial-school
penmanship, feeling certain his companion must have an altogether
more manly scrawl. “‘The neat handwriting of the illiterate,’” he said,
nervously quoting 1984. “Here we go. Mrs. Dulles. And Mrs. Walter
Bedell Smith, the undersecretary’s wife. The Spanish ambassador?
That doesn’t count. Harold Stassen? Foreign operations
administrator for the president? Not actually the State Department, I
guess. Is that where you work?”

“Yes. The job also brings me to the Hill every week or two. But I’m
not due there today until three-thirty. By the way,” he said, taking
Tim’s pad and flipping back to something he’d noticed on the first
page, “there’s no ‘e’ in Roy Cohn.”
“Live and learn,” said Tim, who obediently made a correction.
“Thanks.”
“Come on. We can walk a bit and pick up the streetcar on
Pennsylvania. It’ll get us both where we’re going.”
Tim started gathering his things so quickly that the young man had
to tell him, “Finish your milk. We’ve got time.”
Taking two last pulls on his paper straw, Tim looked at the paragon
beside him and hoped he wouldn’t now tighten his tie.
“Okay, we’re off,” said the man, once Tim had trotted the waxed
milk container to a trash basket. Only when he fell into step with the
handsome stranger did he notice that the bench to the right of the
one they’d shared had been empty all along.
Walking across the Circle to Connecticut Avenue, no more than
ten minutes into their acquaintance, the much taller man said: “And
to think you used to be so talkative.”
Thrilled at being teased, Tim replied, laughing: “I do talk too
much.”
“No, you don’t,” said the young man, giving Tim’s neck a
momentary, affectionate squeeze. The touch rendered him mute,
perhaps the only person in the United States who couldn’t find one
more thing to say about Joe McCarthy.
The man walking beside him broke the silence: “May I ask you a
personal question?”

“Sure.”
“Is this milk-drinking a habit of yours?”
“Sort of. I think they were always hoping it would make me taller. I
didn’t rise to the full five-feet-seven you see before you until I was
seventeen. I guess I developed a taste for it.”
The man nodded. “Glasses?”
“Two or three a day. Small ones.”
“No, idiot. How long ago did you get those?” He tapped the right
arm of the boy’s spectacles.
“Oh!” said Tim. “Had ’em since time immemorial. I must have been
eight. Farsighted. I can read a street sign a block away, but I’ve got a
problem with print or even faces close up.” With his eyeglasses in
place, he could see the man’s expression quite clearly, but couldn’t
be sure what it indicated. A trace of pity? A flicker of real interest in
what he’d been telling him? Anxious when his companion said
nothing more, he went nattering on. “They’re not so bad, really. I
used to have those old steel-wire frames. Got these tortoiseshells
going into my junior year of college. Pretty snazzy, no?” Looking up
into the man’s blue-gray eyes, Tim felt sure that they had never worn
corrective lenses. His own glasses suddenly felt like an artificial limb.
They reached the corner with the streetcar stop.
The man tenderly removed Tim’s eyeglasses. “How many
fingers?” he asked, holding up three just an inch from Tim’s eyes.
“Three,” said Tim, just able to make them out.
“There. You’re healed,” said the man, folding the eyeglasses and
slipping them into the handkerchief pocket of Tim’s jacket.

“You’re a riot,” said Tim, smiling as his heart pounded. He
retrieved the glasses and put them back on and saw that the man
was looking at him with a gaze that could only be called appraising.
He wanted to give this god a playful shove, and thought he could
probably get away with making it look like only that, rather than his
desperate desire to touch this person whose name he didn’t even
know.
The streetcar stopped in front of them.
“I’m Timothy Laughlin, by the way.”
“I’m pleased to meet you, Timothy Laughlin.”
Tim had time enough to see that the man was pleased, but then
the doors of the streetcar opened and the most terrible thing
imaginable happened. As the two of them boarded, three other
people, two women and a child, got between them. Standing in the
aisle of the crowded car as it went down Pennsylvania, struggling to
see past those three other souls, Tim only briefly recaptured his
acquaintance’s attention. The young man gave him a helpless shrug
and a relaxed smile that seemed to say: Oh well, sorry about this
little turn of fate.
Tim got off—there was nothing else to do—when the car stopped
in front of the Star. He waved goodbye from the sidewalk, unsure
whether the man could even see him. Standing in the doorway of the
newspaper’s office, he watched the streetcar continue on its
eastward way, and he knew that if he lived to be a hundred, he
would never be more in love than he was now.
