
PROLOGUE

October 15, 1991
U.S. Embassy, Tallinn, Estonia
“Very snazzy, Mr. Fuller.”
“Very retro,” replied the deputy chief of mission. “Not my tie,” he
added, giving both ends of the black bow a last adjustment. “Your
‘snazzy.’” He turned around to face Ms. Boyle. “It’s a long time since
I’ve heard that one.”
“I suppose I could say you look ‘baaad.’”

silhouette and imagine that it belonged to someone else, another
boy, whose memory was proving persistent tonight, like that last
Porter tune, which even here, in the darkness, he couldn’t quite
dislodge from his head.
He wondered what time it was in Scottsdale, and whether the
embassy’s new phones were as good as Ms. Boyle said.

PART ONE

SEPTEMBER–DECEMBER 1953
In the era of security clearances to be an
Irish Catholic became prima facie
evidence of loyalty. Harvard men were to
be checked; Fordham men would do the
checking.
—DANIEL PATRICK MOYNIHAN

CHAPTER ONE

September 28, 1953
Tim counted four big fans whirring atop their stanchions in the
newsroom. Every window here on the seventh floor was open, and
summer had officially departed six days ago, but that was
Washington for you. When air-conditioning might come to the Star
seemed to be a perennial matter of sad-sack speculation among the
staff: “When hell freezes over,” went one answer Tim had heard in
his three months here. “Because then we won’t need it.”
Miss McGrory, one of the paper’s book reviewers, arrived with a
bottle of whiskey, which she set down next to the punch bowl and
cake, whose single chocolate layer and frosted inscription, “Happy
Trails, Sheriff,” would soon be cut into by the retirement party’s guest
of honor, Mr. Yost, a pressman who’d been at the Star since 1912
and took his nickname from a weekend job he had as a constable
over in Berwyn Heights.
Communion rail.

CHAPTER TWO

September 28, 1953
“Ready?” asked Hawkins Fuller, as soon as Mary Johnson entered
his office.
“Ready,” she replied, noting the gray-striped pants as he swung
his feet off his desk. “But aren’t you overdoing things?” Sporting a
apartment.

CHAPTER THREE

September 29, 1953
“Our Holy Father cordially imparts to Joseph R. McCarthy and Jean
Kerr on the occasion of their marriage his paternal apostolic
blessing.”
When the priest finished reading the pope’s official good wishes to
Senator McCarthy and his bride—a pièce de résistance with which to
end the ceremony—the crowd’s appreciative murmur turned into
applause. A second later, the organist struck the first note of the
recessional and the congregation snapped to its feet for the newly
married couple’s walk back up the aisle.
Joe and Jean—as even Timothy Laughlin couldn’t help but think of
them at this moment—turned from facing the huge mosaics behind
the altar and began their march to the cathedral’s doors. Standing
near the back of the church, Tim would have to settle for imagining
the McCarthys’ smiles until they were much farther along in their exit.
CHAPTER FOUR

October 6, 1953
The handful of observers at the back of Room 357 could see the
shoulders of the witness stiffen. Mr. Edward J. Lyons, Jr.,
representing the Judge Advocate General, gamely proceeded to
describe the frequency with which United Nations prisoners had
been “discovered with their hands tied behind their backs and their
eyes gouged out. They’d been used for bayonet practice and the
like.”
While still in charge in Korea, General MacArthur had been
determined to do things differently from the way they’d been done
during World War II. Rather than waiting for victory—or, as it
appeared to be turning out this time, negotiated stalemate—he’d
begun investigating North Korean atrocities as soon as anyone got
wind of them. The evidence of torture and brainwashing was plentiful
and compelling, and Senator Charles Potter (R-Michigan) appeared
to relish running this hearing that had been convened to discuss it.
McCarthy had not finished honeymooning down in Nassau, but the
atrocities task force of the Permanent Subcommittee on
Investigations was Potter’s responsibility, and he seemed