
PROLOGUE

October 15, 1991
U.S. Embassy, Tallinn, Estonia
“Very snazzy, Mr. Fuller.”
“Very retro,” replied the deputy chief of mission. “Not my tie,” he
added, giving both ends of the black bow a last adjustment. “Your
‘snazzy.’” He turned around to face Ms. Boyle. “It’s a long time since
I’ve heard that one.”
“I suppose I could say you look ‘baaad.’”
Ms. Boyle, Hawkins Fuller imagined, was just on the sunny side of
forty, old enough to know “snazzy” and young enough to know
“baaad,” though for that matter, even he, at sixty-six, knew that
“baaad” meant “good.”
She lingered a moment, the way women still did in the presence of
Hawkins Fuller, imagining when the full head of silvery hair had been
black, the way the eyebrows still were, in Gregory Peck–style
contrast. But Mr. Fuller was better-looking than Gregory Peck.
He, too, lingered for a moment, prolonging the familiar comfort of
admiration. “These,” he finally said, pointing to the stack of badly
printed telexes near the edge of his desk: “Very bad. Not ‘baaad.’
Just lousy.”
“I know,” sighed Ms. Boyle, who doubted that the embassy, still
being flung together, would be getting even internal e-mail anytime

soon. “But that guy’s been working miracles with the phones. They’re
twenty times better than last week. The ambassador talked to
Brussels and Washington twice today. Clear as a bell both times.
And here,” she said, darting back out to her desk and returning with
some regular mail from the pouch. “A primitive but reliable means of
communication.” She could see that the envelopes were personal,
so she set them down unopened and left with a friendly marching
order: “Don’t dawdle. Lucy will be downstairs in five minutes.”
He wondered how many years ago Ms. Boyle would still have
been saying “Mrs. Fuller” instead of “Lucy.”
“All right,” he replied. “And if I do dawdle”—he always did; the
shambling and the daydreaming made his good looks even more
appealing—“just buzz me, Miss Blue.”
Ms. Boyle looked puzzled.
“Ah,” said Fuller. “That one you are too young for.”
She left, smiling as she closed the door, leaving Fuller to pick up
the two bright-orange envelopes atop the pile of mail she’d just
placed on his desk: Halloween cards, a little early, from the
grandchildren in Potomac. Farther down the stack, a letter from
Lucy’s Realtor in D.C., about that house in Chevy Chase she was
determined to buy.
They’d be home for good in another year, and he’d finally take up
the half-time job being held for him at the Carnegie Endowment. Odd
to find himself here, in the meantime, helping out with the New World
Order. He was supposed to have wound up his career last spring,
after the six years in Bulgaria. It had never been that much of a
career, and he’d never much minded that, but as he looked out on
the darkening Gulf of Finland, he seemed compelled to make a fast
review of it, as if it were one of the checking-for-Alzheimer’s
exercises that Lucy wanted to add to their breakfast regimen of bran
muffins and Centrum Silver tablets.

All right: the six years in Bulgaria; the four before that in D.C.; the
four years prior to those at the U.S. mission to the UN. Which put
you back in the mid- and late seventies—some luck for that to be the
era when they finally got posted to New York! And yet, for all the
fiscal calamity and crime (that awful broad-daylight hour when Lucy
came home with a bruised cheek and no purse), he’d ridden the
handbasket through some interesting stops on its way to hell. At fifty,
he’d been too old, really, for the underground pleasures that were
suddenly so unpoliced. But his looks had granted him an extension,
allowed him occasional, plausible entry to the throbbing middle-ofthe-night world west of West Street. It had been some luck, a portion
of his lifetime’s worth, to have made it home from those forays
without so much as a hangover, let alone the time-released fate that
would now be necessitating one of those humiliating obits with their
mention of a “long illness” or “pneumonia” that even Lucy, behind her
newspaper and bran muffin, could manage to decode.
But I digress, he thought, resuming the fast, reassuring rewind. He
reached the six years in Austria (Nixon mostly); then the four in
Sweden, where the draft dodgers had more social status than the
embassy people, who ran down LBJ as much as they decently could
while shaking their heads and nibbling the host’s gravlax. And before
that? The fourteen years, 1952 to ’66, right in Foggy Bottom in the
State Department’s Bureau of Congressional Relations, where he
would have been happy to stay forever, until Lucy decided that he
should use his small accumulations of clout and connectedness to
effect a shift, at the age of forty, from the civil to the foreign service. It
was time for them to see the world, she had decreed.
And that was it, a life span so well recollected, he decided, there
was no need to do the date ranges for the early sojourns in Oslo and
Paraguay, let alone Harvard and the navy and St. Paul’s. Nope, no
Alzheimer’s for Mrs. Fuller’s little boy. Tomorrow morning he’d tell
Lucy to skip the muffins and to scramble some eggs in an aluminum
skillet.

He wondered: When they got home, would there be bus service
from Maryland down to the Carnegie on Massachusetts Avenue?
During his last period at State—’81 to ’85, Reagan I, thank you very
much—he had never gotten the hang of the new Metro, whose
underground rumblings had, in any case, never been permitted to
disturb Georgetown. He was wishing that Lucy would just let them go
back there, and forget about this pile in Chevy Chase, when he
noticed the small white envelope addressed in a feminine hand with
the neatness of his wife’s generation.
One of her Wellesley pals? Maybe, though he couldn’t recall any
Russell in Scottsdale, Arizona. Only after another few seconds did
he see that the letter was for himself and not his wife. So he slit it
open—and soon heard himself saying Christ Almighty.
Dear Fuller,
Tim Laughlin died September 1 in a Catholic hospital in
Providence, Rhode Island. He was 59 and had been sick for
some time. I heard from him often—almost never saw him, but
counted him a good friend.
I don’t know whether you pray (I myself don’t), but if you do, I
know that, even now, he would appreciate your prayers.
Whatever the case, I thought you should know.
Yours sincerely,
Mary (Johnson) Russell
It had been more than thirty years since he’d talked to either one
of them, and it was easier, now, to think of her first.
She had never called him Hawkins. She’d thought it a
preposterous first name and told him so, said “the last shall be first”
and that he would be “Fuller” with her, under any and all
circumstances. He’d replied that she didn’t know the half, that
“Hawkins” was really his middle name, “Zechariah” being the first.

And they’d laughed, she with the sharp glint in her eye that
sometimes made him call her La Pasionaria, not because the glint
was passionate but because it declared, so plainly, that you, Z.
Hawkins Fuller, shall not pass. It wasn’t the castle of sex from which
Mary Johnson had barred him during their long non-affair; that had
never really been at issue. It was any sort of confidence she had
barred him from. It was her trust.
He put her letter back in its envelope, and the envelope into a
drawer, a different drawer from the one into which he’d put the
grandchildren’s cards and the Realtor’s letter.
Poor, sad, merry little Tim, he thought, looking at the clock. AIDS,
of course.
He stood up and walked into the outer office.
“You beat my summons by ten seconds,” said Ms. Boyle. “She’s
downstairs.”
And so she was. Almost as slim as she’d been at Wellesley; her
hair, now a silvery gold, in the same thick little pageboy she’d always
worn; her outfit the one she’d explained to him at breakfast. A
robin’s-egg-blue jacket over a white blouse above a black skirt: add it
up and you had the Estonians’ new, which was to say old, tricolor
flag. No one would expect the number-two man’s wife to go to this
sort of trouble, and no one would fail to notice how much prettier she
was than the number-one man’s wife.
“So,” said Lucy, smiling brightly as she brushed down a couple of
unruly stalks in her husband’s eyebrow, “Ms. Boyle tells me the mails
are coming through.”
“Yes,” said her husband. “Neither rain, nor sleet, nor geopolitical
convulsion…”

Lucy continued to smile, brushing Hawkins’ lapels and enjoying
the way two or three of the Estonian wives here in the reception hall
were noticing her spousal attentions. Perhaps they were deciding
she and Hawkins looked like that older couple in the Ralph Lauren
ads. Hadn’t a Polo shop opened up in Tallinn? Almost everything
else already seemed to have arrived.
“Your Realtor wants us to go a little higher,” said Fuller.
“Our Realtor, dearest.” She performed one last primp, pulling down
Hawkins’ right cuff. He, too, knew that she was showing off their
extended youth and vigor, as if freedom were a good brand of
moisturizer they had wisely chosen long ago. This is what you’ve
been missing for fifty years, she seemed to be saying to the
Estonians, less from patriotism than personal pride.
Fifty years? thought Fuller. More like all but twenty of the last five
hundred. Who hadn’t rolled over this place? First the Swedes; later
the Germans; only after that the Russians.
Having at last let go of her husband, Lucy now clasped both hands
of the foreign minister’s wife, exclaiming over her like a sorority sister
who’d finally made it back for a reunion. Fuller took a glass of
champagne from one of the waiters and moved away from the center
of the room.
Though guests were still arriving, the American ambassador had
already begun his toast to the embassy’s reopening, and all at once
Fuller thought he could recall a party he’d gone to maybe thirty-five
years ago, at the Estonians’ “embassy” in Washington, a sad little
outpost shared by one of the other two captive Baltic nations. A
handful of unlucky young fellows from State had been sent into a
room full of smoked fish and stained suits to keep company with the
exiles, to smile at them as if they were a girl with polio that everyone
pretended would one day, somehow, get up out of that chair and
walk again. Was it possible he’d brought Mary Johnson that night?

Then taken her home in a cab and kissed her, on the cheek, before
ten p.m.?
The ambassador was speaking of the long, unbroken “legal
continuity” of U.S.-Estonian relations, as if the crippled girl had in
some manner gone on dancing all along. But now they could all
welcome her “peaceful return to the family of nations that are free in
fact.” Applause, while Fuller mused upon how this return had very
nearly not been peaceful at all. The Lithuanians, the first to flex their
muscles after the wall came down, had driven Gorby into a real
Stalinist snit, and Tallinn was lucky to have escaped the nasty
thrashing, however futile, he’d dished out to Vilnius.
Now the ambassador tried a bit of wordplay, sparsely appreciated,
about the speed with which Estonia had gone from being a “captive”
nation to a “most-favored” one. He went on to recount the
astonishing events of the past two months: the failed coup in
Moscow; the U.S.S.R.’s panicked recognition of the Baltic nations’
independence; the UN’s offer of seats to the three of them. The
ambassador continued on, even as a murmur of bored chatter began
to rise on the periphery of his audience. Fuller felt a tug at his elbow,
from a young man eager to introduce him to a “formerly persecuted
intellectual” who was now helping to draft the constitution. And once
the ambassador officially subsided, this same avid introducer told
Fuller it was “a great imperative” that he should meet the grizzled old
man now being pulled toward him.
“Yes, of course,” said Fuller, smiling and shaking the old man’s
hand. He understood that here was one of the “forest brotherhood”
who after the war had refused to come in from the cold and accept
the Soviets’ dominion, preferring instead to remain hidden in the
woods. Not guerrillas, exactly; more, Fuller thought, like those
Japanese soldiers who would turn up on a Pacific island, decades
after the war, still hanging on to the fresh shirt they were convinced
they’d wear on the day the emperor took the Americans’ surrender.
Of course, these forest brothers had known the war was over, and

still they’d stayed out there eating bark and twigs—a mystery to
Fuller, who was pleased when the old man, looking hungry even
now, relaxed his grip.
The guest list sent over by the Estonians had been
overwhelmingly indigenous, whereas State, good sports as always,
had made sure to add a dozen or so of the old occupying Russians,
like the one Fuller was being introduced to now, a florid, white-haired
man who’d spent the last thirty years running a phosphate mine—
and five hundred people’s lives—in the northeastern part of the
country. Fuller heard “phosphate” and made a joke about the fizz in
his second glass of champagne; the Russian smiled
uncomprehendingly, until a young man from the Foreign Ministry
who’d just joined them translated the English remark—into Russian.
Fuller realized that after three decades here, this amiable
backpedaler, who had raised his glass higher than anyone else to
the ambassador’s toast, knew fewer words of Estonian than Lucy
had made it her business to acquire on the plane to Tallinn.
“Mr. Deputy Chief,” said the young Foreign Ministry man, “my
pleasure it is to present Mr. Lennart Meri.”
Fuller had been briefed on this polymath: a writer, a film director,
and now the foreign minister himself. Meri was, Fuller now assured
him, handsome enough to be in front of the camera as well as
behind.
“And look who is talking!” replied the minister. In another minute
the two of them were arranging to have lunch—“anything but you
Americans with your breakfasts!”—at the Stikliai Hotel.
A man who’d been with the more conservative wing of the Popular
Front interrupted them. An advocate, until recently, of “autonomy”
rather than full-blown independence, he was in as much of a rush as
the Russian phosphate boss to ingratiate himself with the new
reality. Fuller, displaying the same wide, whitened smile he did for

everyone else, welcomed the gentleman into the circle that was
forming around him.
“You see, Mr. Vice Ambassador,” said the Popular Front man,
more for the foreign minister’s ears than Fuller’s, “it was what you
would call a ‘neat trick’ for us to declare independence once the
Soviet parliament finally pronounced the Molotov-Ribbentrop pact
and the 1940 annexation to have been illegal all along.”
“Explain that to me,” said Fuller, in the same bright tone Lucy was
using to ask the phosphate boss’s wife how she managed to keep up
with her grandchildren in Moscow.
“It was easier for them to admit that we had never been part of the
U.S.S.R. than to let us secede,” said the man from the Popular
Front, making sure his explanation registered with the foreign
minister. “That,” he elaborated, “would have created a bad
precedent. One that many other of the Soviet republics might still be
wanting to use.”
“Nothing succeeds like secession,” said Fuller.
The foreign minister smiled, but the Popular Front man, not getting
the jest, began to fret that he had scored no points after all. Fuller
gave him a friendly tap on the arm and thought: The Jesuits. That’s
what Tim would be saying, with his strong, high laugh about the logic
that had just been offered. The Jesuits would love that, Hawk!
To Fuller’s relief, the musical program was about to begin, peppy
alternations of Cole Porter and Baltic folk songs that Ms. Boyle had
helped to pull together. She was at it even now, setting out the
enameled-eagle party favors they’d been unable to find all afternoon.
After twenty minutes and a fast vodka tonic, and while the Russian
phosphate boss applauded the conclusion of “Friendship”—just a
perfect blendship!—Fuller left the room. He knew that Lucy would
cover for him.

In half a minute he was out on the cobblestones, stepping off into
the night, happy with the autonomy—if not exactly independence—
that he’d always taken as his right. Lucy might make him drive her to
see the sights in Narva next week, and come June she’d have a
houseful of dull friends over from the States to see the White Nights;
but however late he came home tonight, it would be all right. She
lived, he knew, in a perpetual White Night of her own, pushing the
clock back to whatever hour she decided he had come in at after all.
It was really too cold to be out, and Fuller was still wary of walking
here at all. Hard to imagine there were no longer Soviet troops on
patrol. Actually, there were still some, not due to leave for a year or
two more, by which time the Estonians would also have gotten rid of
the rubles they were using even now. Awfully good-looking, some of
those Russian boys he’d seen. Sweet faces, trying to look so hard
under their stiff caps. Alas, how quickly those faces aged and
sagged, the way it was with every good-looking Jewish boy he’d ever
had back home.
Fuller looked up toward a small, pearl-onioned dome, not far from
a stone staircase connecting the city’s old and upper towns. A strong
wind was blowing across the gulf, maybe all the way from Finland,
that country so like himself, for so long half free and quite
comfortable, somehow exempt from the fuss of near-apocalypse.
A young man was passing in the opposite direction. A student,
Fuller supposed: slightly built, hands in big overcoat pockets, puffing
a cigarette. Suggestive of another era; one imagined a book of
censored poems inside the overcoat. Fuller looked back over his
shoulder and, sure enough, found the young man doing the same.
But Fuller’s smile unnerved the boy, who soon continued on, eyes
front, toward his destination.
Fuller was drunk enough that he might have nodded, tried his luck.
But he’d realized, even before the young man averted his gaze, that
all he himself wanted right now was to look at the small receding

silhouette and imagine that it belonged to someone else, another
boy, whose memory was proving persistent tonight, like that last
Porter tune, which even here, in the darkness, he couldn’t quite
dislodge from his head.
He wondered what time it was in Scottsdale, and whether the
embassy’s new phones were as good as Ms. Boyle said.

PART ONE

SEPTEMBER–DECEMBER 1953
In the era of security clearances to be an
Irish Catholic became prima facie
evidence of loyalty. Harvard men were to
be checked; Fordham men would do the
checking.
—DANIEL PATRICK MOYNIHAN

CHAPTER ONE

September 28, 1953
Tim counted four big fans whirring atop their stanchions in the
newsroom. Every window here on the seventh floor was open, and
summer had officially departed six days ago, but that was
Washington for you. When air-conditioning might come to the Star
seemed to be a perennial matter of sad-sack speculation among the
staff: “When hell freezes over,” went one answer Tim had heard in
his three months here. “Because then we won’t need it.”
Miss McGrory, one of the paper’s book reviewers, arrived with a
bottle of whiskey, which she set down next to the punch bowl and
cake, whose single chocolate layer and frosted inscription, “Happy
Trails, Sheriff,” would soon be cut into by the retirement party’s guest
of honor, Mr. Yost, a pressman who’d been at the Star since 1912
and took his nickname from a weekend job he had as a constable
over in Berwyn Heights.
More people drifted in. “We could use a piano,” opined Miss
Eversman, the music critic. She’d covered Liberace’s concert two
nights ago at Constitution Hall and was telling a police reporter that
the pianist’s mother had been in the president’s box with one of
Liberace’s brothers, Rudy, who’d served in Korea.
“So she’s got one boy who’s a soldier?” asked the reporter.
“Maybe she’s got hope of grandchildren after all.”
Miss Eversman laughed.
“Forget Liberace,” said Mr. Yost, who’d started to reminisce about
his first years here at the paper. “I remember seeing Wilson himself
—that’s Woodrow Wilson, not Charlie, to you youngsters—up in his

box at Keith’s Theatre. You wouldn’t have figured it from an egghead
like him, but did that man ever love his vaudeville. You could sell him
any player-piano roll the minute it came out.”
“We really do need a piano,” Miss Eversman sighed, as the
national and managing editors walked in. Mr. Corn and Mr. Noyes
took up positions off to the side of things and remarked to each
other, a bit shamefacedly, on the smallness of the spread.
“Well,” said Mr. Corn, quoting the late Senator Taft’s famously
impolitic advice about higher food prices: “Eat less.”
The party was making Tim feel nostalgic, and thus a bit foolish,
since he’d been, after all, only a summer hire allowed to stay on
through September—or, more exactly, this coming Friday afternoon.
They’d put him in the city room, even though he’d never been to
Washington before June and knew nothing about the District as a
place where many citizens lived life quite oblivious to the federal
government. His placement, he’d come to understand, was typical of
the Star, a paper both venerable and feckless, produced each
evening by an eccentric, occasionally brilliant staff. He had liked it
here and would miss the place, but given the shortness of his tenure
he wasn’t sure he should even take a piece of the cake once it got
cut.
A small stack of the paper’s early edition lay atop an open drawer
of the file cabinet he was leaning against. Ambassador Bohlen was
flying home from Moscow to talk with Secretary Dulles, and this
morning Louis Budenz, a Fordham professor and former red, had
testified to the McCarthy committee that, in his “humble opinion,”
parts of an Army-commissioned pamphlet about Siberia—something
put together to educate the Far Eastern Command—contained large
chunks of Soviet-sympathizing stuff that had been taken, without
footnotes or refutation, from Communist writers.

Cecil Holland, the reporter who’d written the Budenz story, now
saw Tim reading it and asked, “Laughlin, you just graduated from
Fordham, didn’t you? Ever study with this guy who says the army’s
been indoctrinating itself?”
Tim smiled. “I had somebody else for Economics, Mr. Holland.” He
grimaced. “I think I got a C-plus.” Holland laughed and walked over
to claim a piece of the cake that had finally been sliced.
At Fordham, Tim had mostly studied American history and English
literature, and his plan in coming to Washington remained, even
now, to combine his major and minor into a job writing for a politician,
though throughout the city’s hot, depopulated summer he’d made
little headway finding anything on Capitol Hill. Well, he’d have plenty
of time and motivation come Friday afternoon!
The party conversation had turned to Senator McCarthy’s
imminent wedding. “What kind of guy picks lunch hour on Tuesday to
get married in a church?” asked the financial-page editor.
“A guy who’s busy taking over the world,” answered Cecil Holland.
“That’s why he’s marrying a girl on his staff,” added the police
reporter. “Maximum efficiency. She’ll be able to crank out the press
release for Joe’s firstborn as soon as she’s cranked out the baby.”
“Well, from what I hear,” said Miss Eversman, “McCarthy’s mother
might be more surprised by all this than Liberace’s.” Everyone had
heard the rumors.
Would the president show up for the wedding? People began to
take bets. Ike’s contempt for McCarthy was by now well developed,
but it would be hard, some argued, for him not to put in an
appearance, now that he was back from vacation, and with St.
Matthew’s being only a few blocks from the White House.

Miss McGrory, who appeared to regard this talk of McCarthy on
the order of a frog in the punch bowl, returned to an earlier subject
and insisted that they didn’t need a piano. She patted Mr. Yost’s arm
and dared him to get everybody started singing “Oh, You Beautiful
Doll”—Woodrow Wilson’s absolute all-time favorite, the retiring
pressman had reminded them.
Tim, who had been to all the West Side weddings of his
uncountable cousins, right away felt Irish instinct trump shyness. He
joined in as soon as Mr. Yost and Miss McGrory got things going,
and within a moment, even as he remained alone with his thoughts,
was singing the same words as everyone else:

Let me put my arms about you,
I don’t want to live without you.

His job at the Star had come through the nephew of an old pal of
his dad’s from Manhattan Criminal Court, where Paul Laughlin had
worked during what everyone in the family now called the old days—
the ones before Mr. Laughlin, nearing forty, put himself through
LaSalle, by correspondence and then at night, completing his
transformation from process server into accountant, making possible
his family’s move from Hell’s Kitchen to the unimaginably big and
bright new rooms of Stuyvesant Town. Those rooms seemed even
larger now that Tim’s older sister, Frances, the Laughlins’ only other
child, had gone off to Staten Island to live with her husband.

If you ever leave me, how my heart would ache,
I want to hug you but I fear you’d break—

While singing these lines, Tim realized that most of the partygoers’
eyes were on him. His pleasing tenor voice—a surprise to those
who’d heard only his soft, polite speech with its occasional stammer
—had risen above everyone else’s in volume, though to anybody
paying attention to the lyric, it seemed far more likely that any
hugging to involve this five-foot-seven, 130-pound young man would
result in his breakage, not the girl’s. Realizing what had provoked the
attention and smiles, Tim blushed and lowered his voice, while
everybody else raised theirs for the song’s big finish:

Oh, oh, oh, oh,
Oh, you beautiful doll!
Mr. Yost led the revelers’ applause for themselves, and when it
subsided, Mr. Brogan, Tim’s boss on the city desk, announced: “It’s
clear to me that we kept too much of Laughlin’s light under a bushel
this summer. I wish we’d had more for you to do, Timmy.”
Tim smiled and thanked him. Since June he’d mostly typed and
done rewrites, bringing the perfect grammar of the nuns to the fitfully
produced copy of the oldest city reporters, who teased him about
being a college man, and about a pretty girl named Helen, another
summer hire who answered a phone in Classifieds and sometimes
stopped to chat at his desk.
They might have kept on teasing him now, but they didn’t really
know enough about this conscientious, if cheerful, boy, and so the
spotlight soon moved elsewhere. Tim shrank back into himself as

Cecil Holland redirected the conversation to—what else?—the
senator from Wisconsin.
What would McCarthy do next? people wanted to know. Holland
advised them to watch what was going on up in New York: Cohn had
been running subcommittee meetings there, taking testimony in
closed sessions when he wasn’t snooping around Fort Monmouth
over in Jersey. You watch: McCarthy would soon be taking shots at
the army for whatever security breaches he could discover or invent.
“I’m gonna love you, like nobody’s loved you, come Cohn or come
Schine,” crooned the police reporter, reprising a song spoof from last
spring, when McCarthy staffers Roy Cohn and David Schine,
colleagues and pals (some people said more), had gone on their tour
of USIA libraries in Europe, ridding the shelves of anti-American
books by American authors.
No one ever talked half so much about Eisenhower as they did
about McCarthy, Tim reflected; the senator was as constantly on
people’s lips as FDR had been when he was a boy, even if the only
other thing Roosevelt and McCarthy might have in common was the
admiration of Tim’s father. Paul Laughlin still revered FDR (Mrs. R
was now another story), as he had since the First Hundred Days.
Before the arrival of the New Deal, already the father of two babies,
Mr. Laughlin had spent plenty of afternoons playing stickball on the
pavements of the West Fifties, unable to scare up any work pushing
dress racks or plastering or even delivering groceries to widows in
their Ninth Avenue walkups. But by the end of ’33, Paul Laughlin had
become, according to the family joke, “the oldest man in the CCC,”
upstate for weeks at a time, cutting down trees or planting new ones
for what was at least half a living wage. Some kindhearted
supervisor took notice of his hard work and referred him to a pal in
the courts, where he worked his way up toward something like
security and, at last, the cessation of sleepless nights.

Nothing—not even Grandma Gaffney’s cutlery-tapping recaps of
every Father Coughlin broadcast—had ever put Mr. Laughlin off
Roosevelt. He remained true to the president’s memory even when
the war ended and the accounting money started coming in and he
began bringing the Journal-American instead of the Post home to
Stuy Town, which he eventually took to reminding them had been
built by a private insurance company, not as a government project.
By the time Tim was finishing high school, he’d gotten used to
hearing his father say that Bishop Sheen—fine anti-red that he might
be—nonetheless had a foolish sympathy for some of the labor
unions. And a couple of years after that, once the television came
into the living room, Dean Acheson could not come on it without Mr.
Laughlin announcing, in sarcastic imitation: “I will not turn my back
on Alger Hiss.” The line always made Tim and Frances laugh, as if
Acheson were not a person but a corporation with a trademark
pledge, like “Lucky Strike Means Fine Tobacco.”
But for all that, Tim saw no reason why his father—the mildest of
Cold Warriors, really, looking eastward not so much for invading
Soviets as for the house he now hoped to buy in Nassau County—
wasn’t right about the fundamentals of politics.
Mr. Brogan, Tim now noticed, had been buttonholed by Betty
Beale, one of the society reporters.
“Miss Canby isn’t pulling her weight?” asked Brogan, laughing.
“You shock me, Miss Beale.”
“Joke if you want,” said the reporter, to whom the women’s-page
editor was a constant thorn in the side. Miss Beale took her own
work seriously and made a point of actually going to the events she
covered, not just relying on a phone call to the hostess to ask what
cabinet wife had “poured” for which white-gloved ladies in
attendance. “I cannot do this wedding alone,” she now told Mr.
Brogan. “We need more than one piece out of it—something for
tomorrow’s edition, something for the next day, and something for my

weekend column. You know, Mr. Brogan, tonight McCarthy and his
fiancée are having a buffet supper at some friend’s farm out in
Maryland, and thanks to Miss Canby there will be no one present
from the Star.”
The city editor continued listening as Miss Beale thrust home. “It’s
McCarthy, Mr. Brogan. It may be just a wedding, but surely this spills
into your bailiwick—and even Mr. Corn’s. May I please get a little
help?”
Brogan looked around thoughtfully, until he spotted Tim, still
standing against the filing cabinet. “How about making use of this
fine fellow, Miss Beale? He can spell, he’s got a few Hibernian
freckles, and he can even sing. Surely he can get the goods on an
Irish wedding.”
“How about it, cookie?” Miss Beale asked Tim. “Do you think you
can get the names of the people in as many pews as possible? And
get as many quotes as they’re willing to sling along with the rice?
The reception’s at the Washington Club right afterward. You can go
to that, too.”

Tim moved away from the filing cabinet and said sure. It was the
only word he’d ever spoken to the still youthful but formidable Miss
Beale.
“Good, then,” said Brogan, having settled the matter.
“Better than good,” said Cecil Holland, who’d overheard the
exchange. “If Laughlin ever gets hauled in and investigated for
anything, he can always say, ‘But, Joe, I was at your wedding, for
God’s sake!’”
The bottle Miss McGrory had brought in was by now pretty well
drained, and a sizable body of those in attendance were thinking

about adjourning to the Old Ebbitt Grill over on F Street. Tim’s
momentary celebrity earned him an invitation to join the group, but
he decided he’d be better off boning up for this opportunity he’d just
been given, however late in the game it had come. And so within ten
minutes he was on his way home with someone’s copy of the
Congressional Directory, the deluxe edition with photographs. He
could study the pictures tonight and increase the percentage of
guests he’d recognize.
Passing the Old Post Office on the other side of Pennsylvania
Avenue, he was reminded that he’d yet to mail home the letter he’d
been carrying around for the past two days. In it he made his job
prospects sound a lot rosier than they actually were—but then again,
who knew? Maybe this assignment was a portent of better things
that might be coming once he left the paper and got back to passing
out his résumé, this time in earnest, on Capitol Hill.
Should he go up to Hecht’s and get a new white shirt? The collar
was frayed on the only laundered one he had left. No, too expensive,
he decided; he would settle for getting his shoes shined at Union
Station tonight. Walking along Fifth Street, above Indiana and D, he
continued on his career-conscious train of thought, contemplating
the signs for lawyers and bondsmen, knowing that the former
profession was still too much to aspire to, even if the latter one, like
process-serving, now resided in a realm his father had lifted the
Laughlins permanently above.
He bought a pint of milk and a sandwich before reaching his room
on the Hill, in the two-hundred block of Pennsylvania, one flight
above a hardware store. His occupancy was illegal, the lower floors
of the building being zoned only for offices, but a landlady with no
vacancies a couple of blocks away had tipped him off to the nice
Italian owner here, who told him he could have the room cheap and
not to worry. It came with a hot plate and tiny icebox, and a hall
shower one flight up, where apartments were legal.

Tim always made sure to keep the radio low; he clicked it on now
and waited for the tubes to warm up while he poured his glass of
milk. A promo for One Man’s Family became audible as he sat down
and began to drink.
The job ads from Sunday’s paper were on the table, and for a few
minutes he gave them a second, mostly hopeless, look. The
“Situations Wanted” had a hierarchy as discernible as the legal
pecking order on Fifth Street.
YOUNG MAN, COLORED, desires evening or night work of any

kind. Phone LI 8-5198.
After three months down here, the “colored” had ceased to shock; it
was the “work of any kind” that now arrested his attention and made
him wonder how many weeks might be left before he’d have to
consider putting that phrase into an ad of his own.
YOUNG MAN, college education, desires a responsible position.

Call WO 6-8202.

Pretty vague, to say the least, but except for the telephone, which he
didn’t have, it pretty much matched his own circumstances. He
certainly couldn’t compete with the ad just above it:
YOUNG MAN, 27, B.A., Yale, 3 years experience legislative

research. 3 yrs. formal legal training, desires position with trade
assoc. or law office. Box 61-V. Star.

He wondered if Helen had taken any of these down over the
phone.
Setting the paper aside in favor of the Congressional Directory, he
decided to put a ruler over the names beneath the pictures. He
would see if he could correctly distinguish, say, Prescott Bush (RConnecticut) from Bourke Hickenlooper (R-Iowa). At least he was
familiar with his assignment’s location, having gone to St. Matthew’s
last month on the Feast of the Assumption.
He wished he’d done more sightseeing this summer, or just spent
a little less time in this room. He had gone to wait outside St. John’s
Church one Sunday morning in June, hoping to catch a glimpse of
Eisenhower, but a disappointed tourist had told him that Ike was out
of town. Everyone waiting by the church had had to settle for
watching a small group demonstrate against the Rosenbergs’
execution. There had also been an evening, back in July, when the
second-string theater critic had comped him to a production of Major
Barbara. They’d gone to see it together, and afterward the man had
bought him a drink at the Hotel Washington’s rooftop bar, then
walked him all the way home and given him a funny little hug, which
he somehow hadn’t minded, even though the man was old enough
to be his father and didn’t really live, as he’d claimed, on Capitol Hill.
Excited about tomorrow, but a little restless after half an hour with
the Directory, Tim thought he’d like to go out to a movie, but he’d
been to see The Robe just last night, a quasi-religious act he’d used,
pretty Jesuitically, as an excuse not to go to church this morning. He
realized now that Miss Beale hadn’t told him whether Senator
McCarthy’s wedding would be just a short ceremony or a whole
Mass. If it was the latter, he’d have a legitimate excuse to sleep a
little later tomorrow instead of starting his day at the seven o’clock
inside St. Peter’s on Second Street. Actually, he’d better go to St.
Pete’s either way. Even if it did turn out to be a Mass at St.
Matthew’s, he’d be too busy taking notes to line up for the
Communion rail.

CHAPTER TWO

September 28, 1953
“Ready?” asked Hawkins Fuller, as soon as Mary Johnson entered
his office.
“Ready,” she replied, noting the gray-striped pants as he swung
his feet off his desk. “But aren’t you overdoing things?” Sporting a
version of the foreign service’s traditional trousers seemed ridiculous
here in the State Department’s boxy modern building in Foggy
Bottom.
Fuller was unpersuaded. “It’s true that we’re civil servants, Miss
Johnson, but our FSOs are supposed to wear gray-striped trousers
for daylight calls. The reception to which we’re heading constitutes a
diplomatic assignment. It is now six-twenty; the reception begins at
six-thirty; and sunset is not until six-fifty-five.” He flashed his smile,
put on his hat, and offered her his arm. “Just paying tribute to
custom.”
Out on Twenty-first Street, while they waited for a taxi, Mary
reflected that on an actual foreign service officer the overcorrect
pants would appear a clumsy attempt to get ahead. On Fuller they
provided an opportunity to slow his own advance, to stay where he
was through the prankish means of going by somebody else’s book.
A man in the Bureau of Far Eastern Affairs who’d known him when
they were boys at St. Paul’s had told Mary the other day: “Hawk
could have been a real track star, but for the small matter that he
could never see the point in outrunning anybody. Pretty odd for a
sixteen-year-old.”

Fuller held the cab door while she scooped up the edge of the skirt
she’d shortened on her Singer last night.
“That new?” he asked.
“It’s so old it was once New Look, which in case you didn’t know is
as dead as the New Deal. I miss both.”
“Really?” was all Fuller replied.
Mary knew that she wouldn’t have to elaborate on her feelings
about FDR. She had never met a man, here at the job or elsewhere,
more indifferent to politics than Hawkins Fuller. As for the New Look,
she wasn’t going to tell him she missed its long skirts because her
legs were too skinny.
The driver, looking toward the orange glow over the Potomac, had
begun to thrum his fingers on the steering wheel. “Where exactly are
we going?” asked Fuller.
“Twenty-six twenty-two Sixteenth Street,” said Mary, giving the
address of the Lithuanian legation.
“I don’t suppose it has a sign,” said Fuller.
“I’m not even sure it has a telephone.”
The driver pulled away.
“Well,” said Fuller, “you’re a sport to be my girl for the night. I’ll
take you to dinner after we sample whatever funny food they’re
serving.”
Poor plump Miss Lightfoot, who had the desk next to Mary’s, had
been mad with envy when she’d heard about the invitation. Women
in the building, including the married ones, generally went straight to
the department’s Biographic Register after their first sight of Hawkins

Fuller. She’d done it herself, finding out that he’d been born in ’25 to
a businessman father (also St. Paul’s); had performed some minor
naval heroics at the end of the war; then finished Harvard in ’50, just
after his twenty-fifth birthday. Before coming to the department he’d
spent one year working for a branch of his father’s firm in Asunción
and another on a Fulbright in Oslo.
Now he served with Mary in the department’s Bureau of
Congressional Relations. Their boss, Thruston Morton, an
internationally minded Republican who’d once been in Congress
himself, wanted Fuller at tonight’s reception to help convince a
particular congressman on HUAC that State really was serious about
the captive Baltic republics and that a more aggressive approach
could be expected from the still-new administration.
Mary liked Fuller, but experience and instinct left her immune to
the swoonings of Miss Lightfoot and the rest of the distaff staff.
Growing up in New Orleans, she’d seen any number of men, a few
almost as handsome as he, making their solitary excursions into
special precincts of the Quarter. She couldn’t say she’d been
surprised to learn from the Biographic Register that Fuller had
arrived in Washington without a Norwegian wife.
She felt pretty sure he had done some checking on her, too. Fuller
probably knew that she had, more or less, a boyfriend, and that this
romance of hers with a doctor at Columbia Women’s was, for Fuller’s
own purposes, at just the right state of intensity: not so hot that Mary
couldn’t accept someone else’s invitation; not so cold that she’d be
expecting a second date with Hawkins Fuller.
“Nice-enough house,” he said, as the taxi reached the legation.
“But not exactly the Pan-American Union building.” Tomorrow night
Secretary Dulles would be giving a dinner there for the Panamanian
president—a tougher ticket than one to this party being held by the
Estonian government-in-exile, an institution so small it had had to
borrow the Lithuanian exiles’ premises.

Mr. Johannes Kaiv, consul general at the outpost the Estonians
were able to maintain in Rockefeller Center, greeted Mary and Fuller
at the door. An assistant named Miss Horm ushered them into a
parlor, pointing, as she led the Americans through a hallway, to the
portrait of “our President Rei,” presumably hung this afternoon and
on its way back to Rockefeller Center tomorrow morning. “He was
first elected to that office in 1928,” Miss Horm told the guests, with a
bittersweet smile. Fuller interrupted her recitation of all the posts Rei
had held before and since to ask, “Is he here?”
“Oh, no,” answered Miss Horm. “He is in Sweden.”
“A disappointment,” said Fuller.
“Do not believe the reports of his death,” said Miss Horm, in a
lower voice. “These rumors are spread all the time.”
“I’m confused,” Fuller whispered to Mary, once Miss Horm took
leave of them. “Didn’t the Swedes once conquer the Estonians? Are
they now buddies?”
“Sorry, I never took the foreign service exam, either. In three years
I’ve gone from being a secretary in the Passport Office to being more
or less a secretary to the assistant to the Assistant Secretary for
Congressional Relations.” She had been in this new post, a few feet
from Fuller’s own office, for three weeks. “It hasn’t been a meteoric
rise.”
Fuller looked to see if the complaint was serious, and her smile
told him that it wasn’t. Mary had come to Washington once she
graduated from Sophie Newcomb and her daddy, an honest lawyer
on Poydras Street who’d kept his head down during all of Huey
Long, got a congressman friend to get her the job. With her striking
thinness and very black hair she still looked more like the sort of
coed who went to Paris than the kind who became a government
girl.

The little cocktail crowd surrounding her and Fuller consisted, she
soon understood, of a few exiles and a good many more highachieving Estonian-Americans. The department, for all she knew,
had an acronym for the latter, HAEAs. A series of quick introductions
revealed the ones here to include a Maryland state legislator and a
national officer of the VFW.
Fuller had found a seat on a couch and was now tugging at her
navy-blue skirt, urging her to join him.
“We’re supposed to circulate,” she replied.
“Take a load off, Miss Johnson.” He tugged a little harder, until she
sat down. He was already bored, she could see, but confident—as
he had no doubt been his whole life—that people would be coming
to him, wherever he sat. Yes, the reluctant track star: Why run the
race when you’ve already won it?
And come people did, like the wife of a Standard Oil man, who told
Fuller and Mary that the plundered oil shale of Estonia was now
helping to run the Soviet army occupying that little country. The
woman was glad to be here, “showing the flag” with her husband,
who believed in “keeping his hand in.” However unlikely the Baltics’
liberation might be, “you have to have faith,” she told Fuller.
“There’s an optimist,” he said to Mary, once the woman was gone.
“I’m guessing there’s more Esso than Estonian in the husband’s
veins.”
“Well, it is faith of a kind,” Mary countered, less inspired by the
woman’s display of it than she was wearied by Fuller’s insouciance.
“Would you be as mocking if the faith at issue were the religious
kind? The kind Dulles worries we’re losing?”
“I would never mock John Foster Dulles,” said Fuller. “My father’s
colleague on the board of the American Bank Note Company?”

Mary sighed. He hadn’t, of course, answered the question, which
had been about the secretary’s sense that faith was losing its power
to motivate America in the world. Declining to press the point, she
settled for saying: “I miss Acheson.”
“Are you always so awash in nostalgia, Miss Johnson? The New
Deal? Long skirts? Retired cabinet secretaries?”
“I’ve got nothing much against the current one. But I do sometimes
feel like part of the typing pool inside a big Presbyterian parsonage.
With Acheson you knew you were working for a diplomat.” On his
last day, eight months ago, she had joined the long line of
employees walking through the chief’s office to shake his courtly
hand: Thank you for your good wishes, my dear young lady.
“Never met the man,” said Fuller. “At least this time only the boss’
brother has a mustache.” Acheson’s had been a bit reddish. Allen
Dulles—who ran the CIA while his sibling, Foster, ran State—had a
more or less white one. “I can’t imagine growing one myself,” Fuller
continued. “Or would you like me to, Miss Johnson? Do you desire
my advancement?”
“No,” Mary answered. “All I want is that you save me from this.” A
burly man of about forty, carrying two fish-topped crackers, was
moving toward her at considerable speed. An honest-to-God
Estonian, she surmised. Before Fuller could act, however, the
gentleman introduced himself as Fred Bell, born on the Lower East
Side to immigrant parents, but completely American himself, down to
his changed name. A veteran of D-Day who now owned three shoe
factories in Massachusetts. Even so, he was part of an exiles’
committee, and nothing in the world could have made him miss the
opportunity to come down here and say something about the
situation.
“Miss Horm back there told me you were with the State
Department, ma’am. Fifty thousand deportations since the takeover.

Including my cousin, just a peasant, who these days has to work on
a Russian collective. My other cousin over there’s a musician. The
oboe. He gets to stay in Tallinn and play bad music.”
“Why did they deport the peasant?” Mary asked, feeling foolish
using the word.
“Because the peasants resist collectivization. Estonians are
natural businessmen, ma’am. Very independent. You know, my
relatives used to vote. Now they’re impoverished and relocated, or
just gone.” In his anxiety to make the most of the few moments he
imagined he was having in the presence of officialdom, Mr. Bell ate
both of the hors d’oeuvres he had carried across the room. His eyes,
Mary noticed, were watering. “We’re a colony. Stripped of our
machinery, forced to feed them with our crops. Did you know you
used to be able to get eggs from Estonia in New York City? So good
they were exported all that way! What we need is a general strike,
something that with a little encouragement from abroad might spread
to the railway workers in Russia. If they went out, there’s no telling
how soon the whole system might collapse!”
Mary looked at him, apologetically. Despite the supposedly tough
new policy that had dispatched her and Fuller to this party, they were
still required, she knew, to speak the department’s soothing
Esperanto of noncommittal clucks and nods. She found herself
urging Mr. Bell to contact the Office of Eastern European Affairs with
his views—but then she couldn’t remember the name of the
Assistant Secretary for that particular bureau.
She turned to her companion, who’d been busy talking to a retired
languages professor. Fuller saw, and misinterpreted, her desire for
assistance.
“You’re right,” he said, rising. “We’ve got to go. Don’t know how I
lost track of the time. Tere!” he said to Mr. Bell, giving him his card
and propelling Mary toward the door.

“See what I learned?” he asked. “It means ‘Pleased to meet you.’”
“Actually, what I wanted—”
“I suppose ‘Next year in Tallinn’ would have been better, but for
just a few minutes’ work with the languages prof, ‘tere’ isn’t so bad.”
Mary turned around and saw Mr. Bell, half ancient mariner and half
modern PR man, already importuning someone else.
“Let’s get out of here,” said Fuller. “There’s no sign of
Congressman HUAC, in any case.”
“We can’t decently leave yet.”
But Mary saw that they couldn’t accomplish anything, either. A few
minutes later—so soon after sunset that Fuller’s trousers remained
almost appropriate—the two of them were back out on Sixteenth
Street. He put his arm around her waist as they began walking
south. “What are you in the mood for?”
“Scrambled eggs, by my lonesome, at home.” Mary could only
imagine what Miss Lightfoot would say to her turning down dinner
with Hawkins Fuller.
“Well, there’s something to be said for an early night,” he
observed.
“Do you have them?” she asked. “Early nights?”
“Tonight I will,” he answered. “I’m having lunch tomorrow at the
Harvard Club with my mother’s childless brother. Have to look sharp.
I need to stay in his good graces.”
Mary looked at him, but for a moment said nothing further.
“The pants are one thing,” he declared. “But you don’t think I
bought these shoes on my salary, do you? Or that I want his winter

place in New Mexico to go to one of my sisters?”
“How about other nights? Early or late?”
Fuller just smiled, and clasped her waist a little tighter. “What do
you put on your eggs, Miss Johnson? Ketchup?”
He was not, she knew, doubling back to attempt a forward pass;
he had no intention of pursuing an invitation to her place, though she
now recalled the almost pro forma advance he’d made in the
cafeteria two weeks ago, on her third day in Congressional
Relations. He’d been pleased, she thought, when it was blocked.
Had she said yes, he would probably have followed through, happily
enough—all the way from third base to home if she’d let him—but
she had allowed him, she felt sure, to return to more ardent matters
elsewhere.
“Cayenne pepper” was all she replied.
Fuller pretended to wince. “Ah, of course. New Orleans. All right,
spitfire. Let me find you a taxi.” Cabs would be thin on the ground
until they reached New Hampshire Avenue. “Too bad we can’t
share,” said Fuller. “But not all of us can live on the Georgetown
reaches of P Street. What are you, maybe two blocks from your old
friend Acheson?”
Mary, who still probably received more money from her father than
Fuller got from his uncle, said, “So I’m not the only one who reads
the Biographic Register.”
“Knowledge is power,” said Fuller. “Then you know I have a
modest one-bedroom on I Street. Just blocks from the office, really.
Makes the boss think I can’t bear being too far away from my work.”
And makes it easier, thought Mary, for you to arrive, after a late
night, in a rumpled rush—as you often do, putting Miss Lightfoot into
an even deeper swoon. She felt her attitude toward Fuller becoming,

for a moment, almost sisterly. “Do you know,” she asked, as they
kept searching for a cab, “that McLeod is supposed to start doing
interviews in our own little precinct before New Year’s?” Scott
McLeod, the new administration’s security man, with his
“Miscellaneous M Unit,” was hunting through the ranks for moral
turpitude of any kind, but one kind in particular, the kind that still got
the men of the foreign service mocked as “cookie-pushers” whose
striped pants might as well be aprons.
She had tried to ask the question as if it were merely a piece of
office gossip, some water-cooler topic on the order of McCarthy’s
wedding.
“I came in as a certified paragon, Miss Johnson. Letters of
recommendation from Cordell Hull and both Dulleses. Never let it be
said that the Fuller family doesn’t touch all bases.”
She should respond, of course, that she hadn’t been talking about
him, only the morale of the division; but before she could get that
falsehood out, he had flagged down a cab. “You take it,” he said with
a grin. “I’ll get the next one.” He opened the door and made sure her
skirt didn’t get caught. “There. Much easier, I’m sure, than when you
were taking the New Look to such lengths. I’ll see you tomorrow,
Miss Johnson.”
She waved, and watched him pass up another available cab. He
continued along Sixteenth Street, toward downtown, instead of
turning onto New Hampshire, which would have taken him to his
apartment.

CHAPTER THREE

September 29, 1953
“Our Holy Father cordially imparts to Joseph R. McCarthy and Jean
Kerr on the occasion of their marriage his paternal apostolic
blessing.”
When the priest finished reading the pope’s official good wishes to
Senator McCarthy and his bride—a pièce de résistance with which to
end the ceremony—the crowd’s appreciative murmur turned into
applause. A second later, the organist struck the first note of the
recessional and the congregation snapped to its feet for the newly
married couple’s walk back up the aisle.
Joe and Jean—as even Timothy Laughlin couldn’t help but think of
them at this moment—turned from facing the huge mosaics behind
the altar and began their march to the cathedral’s doors. Standing
near the back of the church, Tim would have to settle for imagining
the McCarthys’ smiles until they were much farther along in their exit.
In the meantime he gazed at the huge red-and-white marble pillars
that seemed to be running with blood, and put a quarter into the
poorbox: he’d taken the extra coin from his dresser when he left this
morning, forgetting that, even if there was a full Mass with the
wedding, there wouldn’t be a collection.
He had just counted the twenty-four windows in the cathedral’s
dome, recording the figure in his Palmer-method hand on a page of
his steno pad that included the following notes:
Mrs. Nixon next to Dulles (Allen, CIA not State)
Jack Dempsey! (TELL DAD)

Wilbur Johnson—family friend (Kerrs), brought bride to church
Roy Cohen—McC committee counsel, one of ushers
As soon as the bride and groom were out the door, Tim managed
to leave the cathedral by a side exit, ahead of most of the crowd. On
the church steps he was supposed to pass his notes to Miss Beale’s
assistant. The wedding itself would make it into this afternoon’s
paper, but coverage of the reception would have to wait until
tomorrow’s. He wouldn’t need to deliver his notes on that part of
things until the end of work today.
Finding a place on the steps behind several reporters, Tim tried on
the feeling of being one of them. It was a bad fit, several sizes too
big. All the newsmen seemed full of knowingness, and none of them
was giving his dislike of McCarthy a day off. Eisenhower’s absence
—the president had claimed a conflict with the Panamanian leader’s
visit—was the subject of a few satisfied jokes before the reporters
quieted down to get a quote from Nixon, who was pausing briefly
during his descent of the church steps.
“A beautiful ceremony,” said the vice president, slowly enough for
any pencils still competing with microphones. “The bride was lovely,
but then I’ve never met a bride who wasn’t!” He snapped off a grin
and quickly escorted Mrs. Nixon to the car.
“Did he just insult Joe’s wife?” wondered a man from the Baltimore
Sun. There was, Tim thought, something a little off about Nixon’s
effortful remark, part of the awkwardness you could feel all over the
cathedral steps. “Kiss her, Joe!” the folks on the sidewalk kept
shouting. But the senator wouldn’t comply, and his expression
continued to undergo the oddest alternations. For ten seconds at a
time he’d look like one of Tim’s Irish uncles, the smile ready to issue
a song, but then some saturnine cloud would scud across the eyes
and mouth, turning McCarthy into a baleful, preoccupied spectator at
his own nuptials.

“He looks like he’s ready to push some cookies himself,” said one
of the reporters, pointing to the gray-striped pants beneath
McCarthy’s morning coat.
“Did you know that Torquemada got her to convert for this?” his
colleague asked. “The girl was a Presbyterian.”
Tim scanned the faces in the crowd filling up a whole block of
Rhode Island Avenue. Most of them were women, and the mood
was cheerful, but here and there he could spot someone glaring up
at the groom, displaying a resentment either abstract or deeply
particular. These angry exceptions only added to the off-kilter feel of
the whole event.
Once he’d handed off his notes, Tim hotfooted it two blocks to the
Washington Club in Dupont Circle, where guests waiting to be let
into the reception were sweltering alongside another crowd of
gawkers. Twenty minutes passed before he could get inside this
grand old building to make notes on the white chrysanthemums and
blocks of orange ice in the bowl of nonalcoholic punch. He got as
close as he could to the receiving line. If he were more aggressive,
let alone taller, he might have secured a better vantage point, but
even at some distance he could pick up most of what the politicians
were saying in their overloud voices. Senator Hickenlooper was
there—he recognized him from the Congressional Directory—along
with Teddy Roosevelt’s daughter, Mrs. Longworth, and a
Congressman Bentley from Michigan, identified with the help of a
Detroit News reporter. Between jottings Tim got further glimpses of
McCarthy himself, who he suspected (from long observation of his
male relatives) had just managed to get hold of something more
fortifying than the punch. But the drink had not resolved the
alternations in his facial expression; it was speeding them up.
“Had to settle for wearing this!” cried Joseph P. Kennedy, tugging
at the lapels of his dark business suit. “My own cutaway’s not back
from the cleaners.” This was understood, to general laughter, as a

reference to his son Jack’s wedding, less than three weeks ago, to
Miss Bouvier, the Times-Herald’s inquiring photographer. There
might be no sign of Senator Kennedy here this morning, but three of
his brothers and sisters were right behind the old ambassador.
Tim kept at it until 2:05, through the bride’s vigorous toss of her
bouquet—“That gal can play on my team anytime!” someone roared
—and the newlyweds’ departure in a black limousine, not the red
Cadillac rumored to be a wedding present from some of the
senator’s Texas supporters. Back out in Dupont Circle Tim soon felt
himself sweating through his blue suit. His steno pad was already
soaked from his own palm; thank God, at least, for ballpoint pens.
Looking at the top page of his notes, he realized he would soon be
mystified by his own abbreviations unless he made a fair copy, with
amplifications, right away. So once he’d bought a half-pint of milk at
the big Peoples drugstore, he sat down amidst the late lunchers and
sun-catchers on a bench near the Circle’s western rim. Across the
expanse of grass he could hear the last of the wedding guests
laughing through their departures.
He had just finished transcribing the first page on the pad when he
noticed a shadow approaching: someone also wanting to sit down.
As quickly as he could, he cleared off his milk carton, napkin, and
two loose steno pages from the rest of the bench. “Sorry,” he said,
before he’d even had a chance to look up.
“For what?”
For everything, thought Tim, once he raised his head and saw the
spectacular young man standing over him. Taking in the suit jacket
slung over the man’s broad shoulders and the faint glistening of
sweat in the hollow of his neck where he’d loosened his tie, Tim
wanted to say: For being nothing like you. For being all you’ll have
for company on this bench.
“May I?” said the man.

“Of course,” Tim finally answered.
“Don’t they give you an office?”
Tim laughed. “They’re not even giving me a job past Friday.” And
then it all came out in a nervous, mortifying rush: his graduation from
Fordham; his arrival here in June; his summer of rewrites on the
Star’s city desk; his hope for a job on Capitol Hill; the chance to
cover McCarthy’s wedding.
Realizing that the man’s suit was as fine as his physique, Tim
asked: “You weren’t a guest there, were you?”
It was the most foolish question he could have posed; if this man
had been inside the Washington Club, or even the cathedral, Tim
would certainly have noticed.
“No,” said the man, pointing in the direction of New Hampshire
Avenue. “I was having lunch with my uncle at the Harvard Club.”
Tim nodded.
“So who was there from the State Department?” the man asked.
“Come on: name names, as the groom might say.”
Tim flipped through the pages of his pad, as cooperatively as if
he’d actually been asked to do this in the witness chair. Searching
for a relevant name, he mocked his own parochial-school
penmanship, feeling certain his companion must have an altogether
more manly scrawl. “‘The neat handwriting of the illiterate,’” he said,
nervously quoting 1984. “Here we go. Mrs. Dulles. And Mrs. Walter
Bedell Smith, the undersecretary’s wife. The Spanish ambassador?
That doesn’t count. Harold Stassen? Foreign operations
administrator for the president? Not actually the State Department, I
guess. Is that where you work?”

“Yes. The job also brings me to the Hill every week or two. But I’m
not due there today until three-thirty. By the way,” he said, taking
Tim’s pad and flipping back to something he’d noticed on the first
page, “there’s no ‘e’ in Roy Cohn.”
“Live and learn,” said Tim, who obediently made a correction.
“Thanks.”
“Come on. We can walk a bit and pick up the streetcar on
Pennsylvania. It’ll get us both where we’re going.”
Tim started gathering his things so quickly that the young man had
to tell him, “Finish your milk. We’ve got time.”
Taking two last pulls on his paper straw, Tim looked at the paragon
beside him and hoped he wouldn’t now tighten his tie.
“Okay, we’re off,” said the man, once Tim had trotted the waxed
milk container to a trash basket. Only when he fell into step with the
handsome stranger did he notice that the bench to the right of the
one they’d shared had been empty all along.
Walking across the Circle to Connecticut Avenue, no more than
ten minutes into their acquaintance, the much taller man said: “And
to think you used to be so talkative.”
Thrilled at being teased, Tim replied, laughing: “I do talk too
much.”
“No, you don’t,” said the young man, giving Tim’s neck a
momentary, affectionate squeeze. The touch rendered him mute,
perhaps the only person in the United States who couldn’t find one
more thing to say about Joe McCarthy.
The man walking beside him broke the silence: “May I ask you a
personal question?”

“Sure.”
“Is this milk-drinking a habit of yours?”
“Sort of. I think they were always hoping it would make me taller. I
didn’t rise to the full five-feet-seven you see before you until I was
seventeen. I guess I developed a taste for it.”
The man nodded. “Glasses?”
“Two or three a day. Small ones.”
“No, idiot. How long ago did you get those?” He tapped the right
arm of the boy’s spectacles.
“Oh!” said Tim. “Had ’em since time immemorial. I must have been
eight. Farsighted. I can read a street sign a block away, but I’ve got a
problem with print or even faces close up.” With his eyeglasses in
place, he could see the man’s expression quite clearly, but couldn’t
be sure what it indicated. A trace of pity? A flicker of real interest in
what he’d been telling him? Anxious when his companion said
nothing more, he went nattering on. “They’re not so bad, really. I
used to have those old steel-wire frames. Got these tortoiseshells
going into my junior year of college. Pretty snazzy, no?” Looking up
into the man’s blue-gray eyes, Tim felt sure that they had never worn
corrective lenses. His own glasses suddenly felt like an artificial limb.
They reached the corner with the streetcar stop.
The man tenderly removed Tim’s eyeglasses. “How many
fingers?” he asked, holding up three just an inch from Tim’s eyes.
“Three,” said Tim, just able to make them out.
“There. You’re healed,” said the man, folding the eyeglasses and
slipping them into the handkerchief pocket of Tim’s jacket.

“You’re a riot,” said Tim, smiling as his heart pounded. He
retrieved the glasses and put them back on and saw that the man
was looking at him with a gaze that could only be called appraising.
He wanted to give this god a playful shove, and thought he could
probably get away with making it look like only that, rather than his
desperate desire to touch this person whose name he didn’t even
know.
The streetcar stopped in front of them.
“I’m Timothy Laughlin, by the way.”
“I’m pleased to meet you, Timothy Laughlin.”
Tim had time enough to see that the man was pleased, but then
the doors of the streetcar opened and the most terrible thing
imaginable happened. As the two of them boarded, three other
people, two women and a child, got between them. Standing in the
aisle of the crowded car as it went down Pennsylvania, struggling to
see past those three other souls, Tim only briefly recaptured his
acquaintance’s attention. The young man gave him a helpless shrug
and a relaxed smile that seemed to say: Oh well, sorry about this
little turn of fate.
Tim got off—there was nothing else to do—when the car stopped
in front of the Star. He waved goodbye from the sidewalk, unsure
whether the man could even see him. Standing in the doorway of the
newspaper’s office, he watched the streetcar continue on its
eastward way, and he knew that if he lived to be a hundred, he
would never be more in love than he was now.

CHAPTER FOUR

October 6, 1953
The handful of observers at the back of Room 357 could see the
shoulders of the witness stiffen. Mr. Edward J. Lyons, Jr.,
representing the Judge Advocate General, gamely proceeded to
describe the frequency with which United Nations prisoners had
been “discovered with their hands tied behind their backs and their
eyes gouged out. They’d been used for bayonet practice and the
like.”
While still in charge in Korea, General MacArthur had been
determined to do things differently from the way they’d been done
during World War II. Rather than waiting for victory—or, as it
appeared to be turning out this time, negotiated stalemate—he’d
begun investigating North Korean atrocities as soon as anyone got
wind of them. The evidence of torture and brainwashing was plentiful
and compelling, and Senator Charles Potter (R-Michigan) appeared
to relish running this hearing that had been convened to discuss it.
McCarthy had not finished honeymooning down in Nassau, but the
atrocities task force of the Permanent Subcommittee on
Investigations was Potter’s responsibility, and he seemed
determined to make the most of it. There were no cameras or
reporters here at this closed executive session in the Senate Office
Building, and public hearings on the subject wouldn’t come until
December, but even so, Potter remained energetic—no matter that
the Democrats, who’d months ago quit the committee in protest of
McCarthy’s tactics, refused to come back even for this; no matter, in
fact, that Potter was the only senator, amidst several staff members,
to have shown up this morning. He still looked bent on getting to the
bottom of something awful.

For most of the grim testimony it was hard to remember that this
was the McCarthy committee. But there came a point, in the midst of
eliciting information from Lieutenant Colonel J. W. Whitehorne III,
when Potter made the mistake of thinking out loud: “I am curious
about the twenty-three Americans who are still over there, whom
apparently Communist propaganda got the best of. Or maybe they
went into the service as pro-Communists. Is there any check being
made as to the background of the men still there?”
Once Colonel Whitehorne declared that information on the
defectors was indeed available, Roy Cohn, as if hearing a whistle,
sprang from a midmorning slumber: “What was the answer on that?
Did any of those people have Communist backgrounds?”
“Some of them had leftist leanings,” said Colonel Whitehorne.
“Would we be able to get some documentation?” asked Cohn,
more in the imperative than the interrogative. All at once he was in
possession of the hearing, which now seemed, more familiarly, to be
concerning itself with domestic subversion.
Tim Laughlin had a much better view of Cohn than he had had at
McCarthy’s wedding last week. He wasn’t sure whether to take him
for a mobster or a boy wearing his first suit. The dark, hooded eyes;
the scar down the nose; the slicked-down hair—all these features
fought against the committee counsel’s improbable, extreme youth.
Twenty-six, Cecil Holland, back at the Star, had said.
Tim could see the concern that Cohn’s line of questioning had
provoked on the high, creased forehead of the army’s new counsel,
John Adams. But Tim was looking more closely at Potter, to whom
he might actually be talking once the hearing reached its conclusion.
Yesterday afternoon he’d called the senator’s office to confirm his
appointment and been told by the secretary that he might like to get
a glimpse of Potter in action before coming in for an interview.

With his horn-rim glasses and balding brow, he reminded Tim of
the lay teachers in math and science at St. Agnes’ Boys’ High. He
would have been surprised by Potter’s own youth if he hadn’t looked
him up in the Congressional Directory during his last afternoon at the
Star. Only thirty-six, and already in the upper body after three terms
in the House! In addition to his regular committee assignments, the
senator served on the Battle Monuments Commission, a fact that
somehow appealed to Tim, who last night had imagined getting the
job and making phone calls that would spruce up the cannon at Bull
Run or the statue of Father Duffy in Times Square.
But the crisp zeal Potter was again showing, now that Cohn had
subsided, had to do with far-more-distant battlefields that had barely
cooled. None of the POWs who’d been rescued or exchanged—in a
mental condition more frightening than their physical one—was
seated here this morning. Only the brass were at the witness table,
and it was painful enough hearing the descriptions of torture filtered
through them. Tim could only guess what the impact would be when
the victims themselves testified in a couple of months. Cecil Holland
had told him how McCarthy liked to perform a sleight of hand
between the committee’s executive and public sessions. When pink
witnesses who’d been subpoenaed to reveal their former Communist
ties showed any instinct to fight back during the closed session, they
most likely wouldn’t get called for the open hearing, where McCarthy
preferred to display the timid and guilty-looking. Things would
operate with a strange similarity in this case, Tim imagined. The
more shaky the repatriated prisoners, the more powerful Senator
Potter’s point would be.
All this activity felt reassuring to Tim. Whatever the committee’s
reported excesses, surely not even Miss McGrory, back at the Star,
could object to this particular inquiry. Only three days ago the pope
himself had called for new international laws against war crimes, and
two years before that, Tim had heard Father Beane, the visiting
priest from the Chinese missions, tell about what he and his brothers
had suffered at the hands of Mao’s advancing armies. Even now he

remembered the friar’s cadences and fervor, and how he himself had
sat in the Church of the Epiphany, between Frances and his mother,
thinking: Some “soldier of God” I am! That was, after all, what he
was supposed to have become on the spring Sunday in 1944 when
Bishop O’Neill confirmed him with a symbolic toughening slap to the
face.
But maybe here, in the smallest of ways, he could be helpful in the
fight against godlessness and cruelty. If he went to work for Potter,
he would not just be keeping Father Duffy laureled; he’d be affording
protection to Father Beane as well. It might be the only soldiering he
ever did. He’d never been able to think through what he’d do when
the draft board got around to calling him up. Do you have
homosexual tendencies? Check yes or no. When he’d registered,
almost four years ago in that little office up at Fordham, he’d realized
he was damned either way he answered: he could be an outcast or a
liar. He’d chosen to lie, rationalizing that “tendencies” could be
proved only by experience, and he’d certainly had none of that.
Homosexual tendencies: had Uncle Alan, his mother’s never-married
brother, kept them tucked away with his St. Christopher medal,
inside the backpack he’d carried onto Corregidor? Tim had often
wondered.
Potter was making ready to adjourn, telling the military men that
he’d be out on the West Coast later this month, doing some more
preliminary interviews. While he was away, he expected them to
keep getting ready for the open hearings in December. “We’re
working toward the same purpose,” he said, with midwestern nasality
and a smile. His gavel came down at 11:45 a.m.
Everywhere in the city one could feel that autumn—the season not
of death, Tim always thought, but of quickening—had finally arrived.
What Drew Pearson still called the “Washington Merry-Go-Round”
had, after a summer idling in the weeds, rattled to life, even without
McCarthy in town to flip the switch. Yesterday Governor Warren had

been sworn in as Chief Justice, while Nixon was embarking on a tenweek tour of Asia.
Potter stood up, with a wincing, unexpected slowness, and came
out from behind the committee dais. How large his head seemed in
proportion to the rest of his body, Tim thought, before noticing what
was seriously wrong. An aide had handed the senator two canes.
From the stiffness of his gait, Tim realized that the man was walking
on artificial legs—not the sort of fact that went into the tabular pages
of the Congressional Directory.
And yet, all at once this fact seemed more joking than somber.
Each cane had a little electric flashlight near its top, and Potter was
now playfully using one of them to signal a man three seats away
from Tim.
That man—small and gray and grudgingly groomed, with a thin
face somewhere between mottled and ravaged—returned Potter’s
smile. He then got up to leave the back row, nodding genially to Tim.
“Excuse me,” said Tim, before the man could depart, “do you know
where Room 80 is? I tried to locate it on my way here. I’ve got an
appointment there in—”
“That’s number 80 in the Capitol, son. Not here in the SOB. In fact,
Charlie’s the only s.o.b. not housed with the other ninety-five s.o.b.s
here in the SOB.”
“I have a job interview with him. With Senator Potter, I mean.”
“Well, come with me, young sir. I’m heading there now.”
They trotted down the stairs to the subway that ran between the
two buildings. The older man explained how the senator had his
office in the Capitol to make his handicap less of an inconvenience.
“Of course it’s not so damned convenient when the committee
meeting is here instead of there, but it helps more often than not.”

Tim could smell a peppermint on the man’s breath and wondered if
it was there to mask a morning shot of Four Roses. He could easily
imagine the two of them saying hello on Ninth Avenue, the older man
having emerged from McNaughton’s saloon to slap him on the back
with best wishes “for that fine woman, your Grandma Gaffney,” who
would decline the wishes with a lace-curtain shudder once Timmy
brought them to her kitchen.
The man ushered him to a wicker seat on the jammed little
subway. Tim could see Potter in the car ahead as the two-car train
started down the monorail. While it moved, the man continued
talking in a rat-a-tat-tat like Winchell’s. “It was a land mine that did it,”
he explained. “January 31, 1945, Battle of the Bulge, in the Colmar
Pocket. No choice but to amputate both his pins. Spent a year in
Walter Reed and had to learn to walk all over again. Fella who’d
once been a high jumper!”
Tim nodded gravely in the darkness.
“The VA calls him ‘permanently and totally disabled’!” cried the
man, cackling over the clatter. “Well, it doesn’t keep him from voting
on their budget.”
“What are the lights on the canes for?” asked Tim.
“Hailing cabs.” The man paused for a moment. “Well, we’ll soon
see how ‘abled’ Charlie turns out to be among this crowd he’s in with
now.” He pointed to one of the heads in the lead car. “See our boy
Roy up there?”
“Yes,” said Tim. They had reached the end of the Lilliputian tunnel,
and he could make out the back of Cohn’s freshly cropped skull.
“Don’t use the men’s toilet when he’s around, if you catch my drift.
Though he tends to be enchanted by fellows a little huskier than
yourself.” The man laughed as the train bucked to a stop.

“Are you on Senator Potter’s staff?” asked Tim.
“No,” the man answered, chuckling, as he and Tim made their way
to the Capitol’s first floor. “Let’s just say I’m authorized to help him
out a bit from time to time. Him and some of the other Michigan GOP
men. My name’s McIntyre, Thomas McIntyre. Call me Tommy. Was a
newspaperman for several eternities, down here and up in Detroit.”
Tim shook hands and introduced himself, trying to understand
what this slight, fast-moving man meant by helping the senator out,
and wondering who had authorized him to do it.
“Potter’s a good-enough egg,” said McIntyre, the heels of his
unshined shoes beating a fast rhythm across the marble corridor.
“He’s managed to vote for foreign aid but not forget it’s the
automakers who sent him here. You know,” he continued, almost
reflective, “he ought to be an interesting fellow. He was actually a
social worker before he went off to the war. But he’s got one
handicap worse than no legs.”
“Really?” asked Tim, as McIntyre knocked on the door of Room
80.
“Yeah. A permanent charley horse between his ears!”
McIntyre was still laughing when the door to the senator’s office
was opened—by a man with one arm.
“His driver,” whispered Tommy. “No foolin’!”
Miss Antoinette Cook, the woman Tim had spoken with on the
phone, introduced him to Robert L. Jones, a still-young man who
looked as if he might be Potter’s executive assistant, and whose
speech carried the salt of a Maine accent. “Oh, yes, Mr. Laughlin,”
he said, appearing less than pleased by Tim’s arrival, let alone
McIntyre’s. “The fellow that Hawkins Fuller recommended when he
was up here to defend State’s latest excessive appropriation.”

McIntyre looked at Tim with an encouraging smile, and then alarm.
“Jesus, kid, your face has gone white. It’s only a job interview. This
ain’t the Depression.”
Hawkins Fuller.
Tim managed to nod and shake Mr. Jones’s hand, while McIntyre
cheerfully took charge of the situation. “Put him to work, Jones. See
what he can do. Better yet, see if he can do the bit of work I was
going to do for you today. Here, son, this is a copy of what
Knowland’s planning to say on the floor a couple of hours from now. I
got it from his press man. It’s no different from what he said at his
press conference yesterday, but it’s a couple of decibels higher, and
it’s going to make a splash. So why don’t you sit down at one of the
Underwoods here and write a couple of paragraphs that Charlie can
say in support of it?”
Mr. Jones had already lost interest in Timothy Laughlin; he was on
a phone behind Miss Cook, cupping his hand over the receiver.
“Go on, read it, read it,” said Tommy McIntyre, as he wheeled a
typist’s chair into position behind Tim.
Senator Knowland, the majority leader, had come home from his
world tour the other day and learned of Adlai Stevenson’s call for a
nonaggression pact with the Russians—a proposal that had irritated
the California senator to an extreme degree. “Now watch the
Koreans drag out the Panmunjom talks,” he was warning. “This will
be one more sign that we need to put our house in order and our
rifles at the ready. Time is not on the side of the Free World, and we
don’t need Mr. Stevenson, after his massive repudiation at the polls,
recommending that we play at useless diplomacy.”
Tim had only a slight idea of how Potter spoke, but he was pretty
sure the point of this writing assignment was to make him sound as
implacable as Knowland. So he took up a yellow pad and made
several notes for a few paragraphs of oratory. To begin with,

Knowland must be extolled. To continue, Stevenson must be
excoriated, for his attempt “not only to bend over backwards, but to
roll out the red carpet for our adversaries of that same color.” The
prose began to flow almost automatically. The defeated Democrat
was proposing “a nonaggression pact with a flagrant aggressor.” To
conclude, one needed to take a shot at India, a sentimental favorite
of liberals, which Knowland had accused of backing the North
Korean position before the peace talks had even gotten underway.
“In my great automobile-making state,” wrote Tim as Potter, “we’re
wary of any car or country that stays in ‘neutral’ for too long. ‘Neutral’
is what you’re in when you roll downhill.”
After penciling in a few revisions, Tim rolled a sheet of paper into
the Underwood and typed up this stentorian boilerplate. Struck by his
own speed, he realized how the words—for all that he believed
them, and he more or less did—seemed to be coming from neither
Potter’s brain nor his own. He was speaking in another voice entirely
—the way, as an altar boy during Mass, he would be saying his Latin
part while still hearing the English words of whatever hymn had
soared through the church a few minutes before. He proofread the
little speech a second time, to make sure he hadn’t typed the words
“Hawkins Fuller” somewhere in the middle of one of its sentences.
Then he handed the page to Mr. McIntyre.
“Fast fella, aren’t you?” the lined little man said with a grin, before
carrying the speech to the suite’s innermost office. Before five
minutes passed, he reemerged, in the company of Senator Potter
and a third man. All of them, carrying their hats, headed toward Tim.
“Another Irish wordsmith!” enthused the senator, who put both his
canes in his left hand, so that his right could extend itself to Tim.
“Welcome to the staff, Mr. Laughlin.”
Tim shook Potter’s hand and realized with embarrassment that he
had been looking down at the senator’s feet.

Potter seemed pleased by the
awkwardness he encountered daily.

chance

to

alleviate

an

“I was just telling Mr. Jeffreys, my Lansing constituent here, that
I’m looking forward to some duck hunting on the Upper Peninsula
this winter. These days I’m able to glide around in some paper-thin
galoshes my wife gave me, while my pals have to clomp and sweat
in boots that weigh a ton. ‘Aren’t your feet cold?’ one of them asked
me last year. ‘Not exactly!’ I told him. ‘Unless they’re feeling chilly
wherever I left ’em in France!’” He paused to laugh. “Everything’s got
its advantages.”
Tim smiled, more in awe than humor. Potter clapped him on the
shoulder and continued on out with McIntyre and Mr. Jeffreys. Miss
Cook then presented him with two forms to be filled out. “You can
bring these back with you when you start Monday morning, Mr.
Laughlin.”
Tim thanked her and everybody else still in the office. A minute or
so later, halfway down the Capitol’s east steps, he paused to sit
beside a huge stone pediment supporting an ornate lamppost. He
closed his eyes and shook off the image of Potter’s severed feet, lost
somewhere in the soil of France. It wasn’t hard to banish the picture;
his mind had no room for it, or even for the fact that he could now
pay the rent and write home with some good news. His mind was
filled with the afternoon of McCarthy’s wedding, exactly a week ago.
An hour after getting off the streetcar, he’d been summoned to a
telephone on the other side of the city room. “A call from Capitol Hill,”
he’d been told. Through the receiver had come the voice he’d heard
an hour before and never expected to hear again: “Send your
résumé and a letter of application to the attention of Miss Antoinette
Cook. The job is a junior assistant with writing duties.”
Dumbfounded, Tim had written down the address and phone
number for Potter’s office. “Thank you,” he’d managed to say.

“If you get the job, treat yourself to a glass of chocolate milk.”
And with that the still-nameless voice had left the line.
Hawkins Fuller.
Now, a week later, Tim sat for another moment on the steps,
before he opened his eyes to see a flag being run up one of the
distant poles on the Capitol’s roof. It was a familiar sight: he knew
that this flag would wave for only a moment before being lowered
and shipped to some elementary school in Cheyenne or Mill Valley,
where the teachers could tell the students it had flown over the U.S.
Capitol. But for the few seconds it was aloft, filled with what might be
two new separate futures, Tim looked at it with his hand over his
heart.

October 6, 1953
Dear Rep. Fish:
You may assure your Dutch-American constituent in
Wappingers Falls that the Department of State views all recent
violence in Indonesia with the greatest possible concern. As
Secretary Dulles remarked on…
Mary Johnson proofread her letter to the New York congressman
and sank into the feeling of futility that often overcame her by
midafternoon. What could any of these well-meant epistolary
stitchings and swabbings really do to treat the wounds of the tortured
world? There was news this week that Lockheed had begun work on
a nuclear-powered airplane; no doubt it would be carrying an atomic
bomb as well.
Behind Mary, Miss Lightfoot was speaking to Beverly Phillips
about the woman in the Office of Legal Advisors who’d just won a

four-thousand-dollar car in WMAL’s “Mystery Voice” contest.
“Well,” said Mrs. Phillips, “she won’t have any trouble making her
Community Chest contribution.”
Mary laughed. Underneath the correspondence piling up for the
bureau chief’s signature lay her copy of the memo from R. W. Scott
McLeod, security officer to 1,142 employees, informing all of them
that if they chose not to make a Community Chest contribution this
year, they must report to his office for an interview. Secretary Dulles
was chairman of the department’s drive, and McLeod’s zeal to show
the boss what a little extra aggression could accomplish had sparked
much grumbling about the “Conformity Chest.”
“There’s nothing wrong with what McLeod is doing,” said Miss
Lightfoot, in her near-chronic tone of irritation. “He’s just trying for
one-hundred-percent participation. He’ll lend you a dollar if you can’t
contribute one on your own.”
Mary turned her small swivel chair so that she and Beverly Phillips
could each raise an eyebrow to the other. Miss Lightfoot also found
nothing wrong with McLeod’s unceasing security-risk investigations.
Indeed, she seemed disappointed with the estimate that his review
of things wouldn’t reach Congressional Relations until December.
A young man carrying a book now came through the door,
confusing Mary, who took him for the summer office boy from
Eastern European Affairs. Hadn’t he returned to school?
“Is Mr. Fuller in?” the boy asked. He stammered over the “F” in
Fuller. “I couldn’t find him on the wall directory, but the man at the
front desk told me to come here.”
Mary smiled. She realized that this wasn’t the boy from EEA,
though he did look a little like the lovesick Donald O’Connor in Call
Me Madam, the only musical anyone would ever care to make about
this place. And then it occurred to her. This skinny fellow was

lovesick. She looked at him gently, filling up with annoyance toward
Fuller as she did so. What new recklessness of his had made this
boy venture here with a handful of pebbles to throw at Romeo’s
window?
“I’m afraid he left early. To go to the Georgetown library, I believe.”
“The library at George Washington U.,” Miss Lightfoot corrected.
“Thank you,” said Mary. Her colleague, already matronly though
no more than thirty-five, certainly kept track of Fuller.
“Will he be back?” the young man asked.
“I doubt it,” said Mary.
Managing not to stammer, the boy said, “I was bringing him this.”
He handed Mary a new biography of the elder Henry Cabot Lodge. A
receipt from Trover’s bookshop stuck out of it. An odd present to
bring here, thought Mary, Lodge not exactly having been an
internationalist. But it was a big and serious book—impressive, the
boy had probably reasoned—and he had spent six dollars on it.
“You could leave it here,” she said. “I’ll see that Mr. Fuller gets it.”
The boy still looked crestfallen.
“You can leave a note, too,” Mary added. “So he’ll be sure to know
who it’s from.”
“I’ll write one inside the book,” the young man declared, looking
more hopeful.
Mary pointed to the empty chair at the side of her desk and
watched him fumble for his ballpoint pen. His handwriting was so
neat she could read it upside down without the least effort.

With thanks to Hawkins Fuller
(I got the job. You’re wonderful.)
Timothy Laughlin
“Does he know where to reach you?” asked Mary, trying to sound
casual instead of confidential. “Is there a number you’d like to
leave?”
“I’m not on the phone,” said Timothy Laughlin. A cloud rushed over
the map of Ireland that was his face—mortification, Mary thought, at
having used such a tenement archaism. “But I’ll put my address with
it,” he added, recovering enough equilibrium to accept the index card
that Mary gave him to write it on. He also removed the bookshop
receipt, and asked if she could direct him back to the Twenty-first
Street entrance.
After he’d gone, she prepared the envelope for another soothing
letter, to Congressman Ikard of Texas. Adjusting her typewriter’s left
margin, she noticed Miss Lightfoot smoothing her strawberry-blond
permanent wave, and realized what close attention the woman had
paid to the boy’s visit.
