October 15, 1991
U.S. Embassy, Tallinn, Estonia
“Very snazzy, Mr. Fuller.”
“Very retro,” replied the deputy chief of mission. “Not my tie,” he
added, giving both ends of the black bow a last adjustment. “Your
‘snazzy.’” He turned around to face Ms. Boyle. “It’s a long time since
I’ve heard that one.”
“I suppose I could say you look ‘baaad.’”
Ms. Boyle, Hawkins Fuller imagined, was just on the sunny side of
forty, old enough to know “snazzy” and young enough to know
“baaad,” though for that matter, even he, at sixty-six, knew that
“baaad” meant “good.”
She lingered a moment, the way women still did in the presence of
Hawkins Fuller, imagining when the full head of silvery hair had been
black, the way the eyebrows still were, in Gregory Peck–style
contrast. But Mr. Fuller was better-looking than Gregory Peck.
He, too, lingered for a moment, prolonging the familiar comfort of
admiration. “These,” he finally said, pointing to the stack of badly
printed telexes near the edge of his desk: “Very bad. Not ‘baaad.’
Just lousy.”
“I know,” sighed Ms. Boyle, who doubted that the embassy, still
being flung together, would be getting even internal e-mail anytime

soon. “But that guy’s been working miracles with the phones. They’re
twenty times better than last week. The ambassador talked to
Brussels and Washington twice today. Clear as a bell both times.
And here,” she said, darting back out to her desk and returning with
some regular mail from the pouch. “A primitive but reliable means of
communication.” She could see that the envelopes were personal,
so she set them down unopened and left with a friendly marching
order: “Don’t dawdle. Lucy will be downstairs in five minutes.”
He wondered how many years ago Ms. Boyle would still have
been saying “Mrs. Fuller” instead of “Lucy.”
“All right,” he replied. “And if I do dawdle”—he always did; the
shambling and the daydreaming made his good looks even more
appealing—“just buzz me, Miss Blue.”
Ms. Boyle looked puzzled.
“Ah,” said Fuller. “That one you are too young for.”
She left, smiling as she closed the door, leaving Fuller to pick up
the two bright-orange envelopes atop the pile of mail she’d just
placed on his desk: Halloween cards, a little early, from the
grandchildren in Potomac. Farther down the stack, a letter from
Lucy’s Realtor in D.C., about that house in Chevy Chase she was
determined to buy.
They’d be home for good in another year, and he’d finally take up
the half-time job being held for him at the Carnegie Endowment. Odd
to find himself here, in the meantime, helping out with the New World
Order. He was supposed to have wound up his career last spring,
after the six years in Bulgaria. It had never been that much of a
career, and he’d never much minded that, but as he looked out on
the darkening Gulf of Finland, he seemed compelled to make a fast
review of it, as if it were one of the checking-for-Alzheimer’s
exercises that Lucy wanted to add to their breakfast regimen of bran
muffins and Centrum Silver tablets.

All right: the six years in Bulgaria; the four before that in D.C.; the
four years prior to those at the U.S. mission to the UN. Which put
you back in the mid- and late seventies—some luck for that to be the
era when they finally got posted to New York! And yet, for all the
fiscal calamity and crime (that awful broad-daylight hour when Lucy
came home with a bruised cheek and no purse), he’d ridden the
handbasket through some interesting stops on its way to hell. At fifty,
he’d been too old, really, for the underground pleasures that were
suddenly so unpoliced. But his looks had granted him an extension,
allowed him occasional, plausible entry to the throbbing middle-ofthe-night world west of West Street. It had been some luck, a portion
of his lifetime’s worth, to have made it home from those forays
without so much as a hangover, let alone the time-released fate that
would now be necessitating one of those humiliating obits with their
mention of a “long illness” or “pneumonia” that even Lucy, behind her
newspaper and bran muffin, could manage to decode.
But I digress, he thought, resuming the fast, reassuring rewind. He
reached the six years in Austria (Nixon mostly); then the four in
Sweden, where the draft dodgers had more social status than the
embassy people, who ran down LBJ as much as they decently could
while shaking their heads and nibbling the host’s gravlax. And before
that? The fourteen years, 1952 to ’66, right in Foggy Bottom in the
State Department’s Bureau of Congressional Relations, where he
would have been happy to stay forever, until Lucy decided that he
should use his small accumulations of clout and connectedness to
effect a shift, at the age of forty, from the civil to the foreign service. It
was time for them to see the world, she had decreed.
And that was it, a life span so well recollected, he decided, there
was no need to do the date ranges for the early sojourns in Oslo and
Paraguay, let alone Harvard and the navy and St. Paul’s. Nope, no
Alzheimer’s for Mrs. Fuller’s little boy. Tomorrow morning he’d tell
Lucy to skip the muffins and to scramble some eggs in an aluminum
skillet.

He wondered: When they got home, would there be bus service
from Maryland down to the Carnegie on Massachusetts Avenue?
During his last period at State—’81 to ’85, Reagan I, thank you very
much—he had never gotten the hang of the new Metro, whose
underground rumblings had, in any case, never been permitted to
disturb Georgetown. He was wishing that Lucy would just let them go
back there, and forget about this pile in Chevy Chase, when he
noticed the small white envelope addressed in a feminine hand with
the neatness of his wife’s generation.
One of her Wellesley pals? Maybe, though he couldn’t recall any
Russell in Scottsdale, Arizona. Only after another few seconds did
he see that the letter was for himself and not his wife. So he slit it
open—and soon heard himself saying Christ Almighty.
Dear Fuller,
Tim Laughlin died September 1 in a Catholic hospital in
Providence, Rhode Island. He was 59 and had been sick for
some time. I heard from him often—almost never saw him, but
counted him a good friend.
I don’t know whether you pray (I myself don’t), but if you do, I
know that, even now, he would appreciate your prayers.
Whatever the case, I thought you should know.
Yours sincerely,
Mary (Johnson) Russell
It had been more than thirty years since he’d talked to either one
of them, and it was easier, now, to think of her first.
She had never called him Hawkins. She’d thought it a
preposterous first name and told him so, said “the last shall be first”
and that he would be “Fuller” with her, under any and all
circumstances. He’d replied that she didn’t know the half, that
“Hawkins” was really his middle name, “Zechariah” being the first.

And they’d laughed, she with the sharp glint in her eye that
sometimes made him call her La Pasionaria, not because the glint
was passionate but because it declared, so plainly, that you, Z.
Hawkins Fuller, shall not pass. It wasn’t the castle of sex from which
Mary Johnson had barred him during their long non-affair; that had
never really been at issue. It was any sort of confidence she had
barred him from. It was her trust.
He put her letter back in its envelope, and the envelope into a
drawer, a different drawer from the one into which he’d put the
grandchildren’s cards and the Realtor’s letter.
Poor, sad, merry little Tim, he thought, looking at the clock. AIDS,
of course.
He stood up and walked into the outer office.
“You beat my summons by ten seconds,” said Ms. Boyle. “She’s
downstairs.”
And so she was. Almost as slim as she’d been at Wellesley; her
hair, now a silvery gold, in the same thick little pageboy she’d always
worn; her outfit the one she’d explained to him at breakfast. A
robin’s-egg-blue jacket over a white blouse above a black skirt: add it
up and you had the Estonians’ new, which was to say old, tricolor
flag. No one would expect the number-two man’s wife to go to this
sort of trouble, and no one would fail to notice how much prettier she
was than the number-one man’s wife.
“So,” said Lucy, smiling brightly as she brushed down a couple of
unruly stalks in her husband’s eyebrow, “Ms. Boyle tells me the mails
are coming through.”
“Yes,” said her husband. “Neither rain, nor sleet, nor geopolitical
convulsion…”

Lucy continued to smile, brushing Hawkins’ lapels and enjoying
the way two or three of the Estonian wives here in the reception hall
were noticing her spousal attentions. Perhaps they were deciding
she and Hawkins looked like that older couple in the Ralph Lauren
ads. Hadn’t a Polo shop opened up in Tallinn? Almost everything
else already seemed to have arrived.
“Your Realtor wants us to go a little higher,” said Fuller.
“Our Realtor, dearest.” She performed one last primp, pulling down
Hawkins’ right cuff. He, too, knew that she was showing off their
extended youth and vigor, as if freedom were a good brand of
moisturizer they had wisely chosen long ago. This is what you’ve
been missing for fifty years, she seemed to be saying to the
Estonians, less from patriotism than personal pride.
Fifty years? thought Fuller. More like all but twenty of the last five
hundred. Who hadn’t rolled over this place? First the Swedes; later
the Germans; only after that the Russians.
Having at last let go of her husband, Lucy now clasped both hands
of the foreign minister’s wife, exclaiming over her like a sorority sister
who’d finally made it back for a reunion. Fuller took a glass of
champagne from one of the waiters and moved away from the center
of the room.
Though guests were still arriving, the American ambassador had
already begun his toast to the embassy’s reopening, and all at once
Fuller thought he could recall a party he’d gone to maybe thirty-five
years ago, at the Estonians’ “embassy” in Washington, a sad little
outpost shared by one of the other two captive Baltic nations. A
handful of unlucky young fellows from State had been sent into a
room full of smoked fish and stained suits to keep company with the
exiles, to smile at them as if they were a girl with polio that everyone
pretended would one day, somehow, get up out of that chair and
walk again. Was it possible he’d brought Mary Johnson that night?

Then taken her home in a cab and kissed her, on the cheek, before
ten p.m.?
The ambassador was speaking of the long, unbroken “legal
continuity” of U.S.-Estonian relations, as if the crippled girl had in
some manner gone on dancing all along. But now they could all
welcome her “peaceful return to the family of nations that are free in
fact.” Applause, while Fuller mused upon how this return had very
nearly not been peaceful at all. The Lithuanians, the first to flex their
muscles after the wall came down, had driven Gorby into a real
Stalinist snit, and Tallinn was lucky to have escaped the nasty
thrashing, however futile, he’d dished out to Vilnius.
Now the ambassador tried a bit of wordplay, sparsely appreciated,
about the speed with which Estonia had gone from being a “captive”
nation to a “most-favored” one. He went on to recount the
astonishing events of the past two months: the failed coup in
Moscow; the U.S.S.R.’s panicked recognition of the Baltic nations’
independence; the UN’s offer of seats to the three of them. The
ambassador continued on, even as a murmur of bored chatter began
to rise on the periphery of his audience. Fuller felt a tug at his elbow,
from a young man eager to introduce him to a “formerly persecuted
intellectual” who was now helping to draft the constitution. And once
the ambassador officially subsided, this same avid introducer told
Fuller it was “a great imperative” that he should meet the grizzled old
man now being pulled toward him.
“Yes, of course,” said Fuller, smiling and shaking the old man’s
hand. He understood that here was one of the “forest brotherhood”
who after the war had refused to come in from the cold and accept
the Soviets’ dominion, preferring instead to remain hidden in the
woods. Not guerrillas, exactly; more, Fuller thought, like those
Japanese soldiers who would turn up on a Pacific island, decades
after the war, still hanging on to the fresh shirt they were convinced
they’d wear on the day the emperor took the Americans’ surrender.
Of course, these forest brothers had known the war was over, and

still they’d stayed out there eating bark and twigs—a mystery to
Fuller, who was pleased when the old man, looking hungry even
now, relaxed his grip.
The guest list sent over by the Estonians had been
overwhelmingly indigenous, whereas State, good sports as always,
had made sure to add a dozen or so of the old occupying Russians,
like the one Fuller was being introduced to now, a florid, white-haired
man who’d spent the last thirty years running a phosphate mine—
and five hundred people’s lives—in the northeastern part of the
country. Fuller heard “phosphate” and made a joke about the fizz in
his second glass of champagne; the Russian smiled
uncomprehendingly, until a young man from the Foreign Ministry
who’d just joined them translated the English remark—into Russian.
Fuller realized that after three decades here, this amiable
backpedaler, who had raised his glass higher than anyone else to
the ambassador’s toast, knew fewer words of Estonian than Lucy
had made it her business to acquire on the plane to Tallinn.
“Mr. Deputy Chief,” said the young Foreign Ministry man, “my
pleasure it is to present Mr. Lennart Meri.”
Fuller had been briefed on this polymath: a writer, a film director,
and now the foreign minister himself. Meri was, Fuller now assured
him, handsome enough to be in front of the camera as well as
behind.
“And look who is talking!” replied the minister. In another minute
the two of them were arranging to have lunch—“anything but you
Americans with your breakfasts!”—at the Stikliai Hotel.
A man who’d been with the more conservative wing of the Popular
Front interrupted them. An advocate, until recently, of “autonomy”
rather than full-blown independence, he was in as much of a rush as
the Russian phosphate boss to ingratiate himself with the new
reality. Fuller, displaying the same wide, whitened smile he did for

everyone else, welcomed the gentleman into the circle that was
forming around him.
“You see, Mr. Vice Ambassador,” said the Popular Front man,
more for the foreign minister’s ears than Fuller’s, “it was what you
would call a ‘neat trick’ for us to declare independence once the
Soviet parliament finally pronounced the Molotov-Ribbentrop pact
and the 1940 annexation to have been illegal all along.”
“Explain that to me,” said Fuller, in the same bright tone Lucy was
using to ask the phosphate boss’s wife how she managed to keep up
with her grandchildren in Moscow.
“It was easier for them to admit that we had never been part of the
U.S.S.R. than to let us secede,” said the man from the Popular
Front, making sure his explanation registered with the foreign
minister. “That,” he elaborated, “would have created a bad
precedent. One that many other of the Soviet republics might still be
wanting to use.”
“Nothing succeeds like secession,” said Fuller.
The foreign minister smiled, but the Popular Front man, not getting
the jest, began to fret that he had scored no points after all. Fuller
gave him a friendly tap on the arm and thought: The Jesuits. That’s
what Tim would be saying, with his strong, high laugh about the logic
that had just been offered. The Jesuits would love that, Hawk!
To Fuller’s relief, the musical program was about to begin, peppy
alternations of Cole Porter and Baltic folk songs that Ms. Boyle had
helped to pull together. She was at it even now, setting out the
enameled-eagle party favors they’d been unable to find all afternoon.
After twenty minutes and a fast vodka tonic, and while the Russian
phosphate boss applauded the conclusion of “Friendship”—just a
perfect blendship!—Fuller left the room. He knew that Lucy would
cover for him.

In half a minute he was out on the cobblestones, stepping off into
the night, happy with the autonomy—if not exactly independence—
that he’d always taken as his right. Lucy might make him drive her to
see the sights in Narva next week, and come June she’d have a
houseful of dull friends over from the States to see the White Nights;
but however late he came home tonight, it would be all right. She
lived, he knew, in a perpetual White Night of her own, pushing the
clock back to whatever hour she decided he had come in at after all.
It was really too cold to be out, and Fuller was still wary of walking
here at all. Hard to imagine there were no longer Soviet troops on
patrol. Actually, there were still some, not due to leave for a year or
two more, by which time the Estonians would also have gotten rid of
the rubles they were using even now. Awfully good-looking, some of
those Russian boys he’d seen. Sweet faces, trying to look so hard
under their stiff caps. Alas, how quickly those faces aged and
sagged, the way it was with every good-looking Jewish boy he’d ever
had back home.
Fuller looked up toward a small, pearl-onioned dome, not far from
a stone staircase connecting the city’s old and upper towns. A strong
wind was blowing across the gulf, maybe all the way from Finland,
that country so like himself, for so long half free and quite
comfortable, somehow exempt from the fuss of near-apocalypse.
A young man was passing in the opposite direction. A student,
Fuller supposed: slightly built, hands in big overcoat pockets, puffing
a cigarette. Suggestive of another era; one imagined a book of
censored poems inside the overcoat. Fuller looked back over his
shoulder and, sure enough, found the young man doing the same.
But Fuller’s smile unnerved the boy, who soon continued on, eyes
front, toward his destination.
Fuller was drunk enough that he might have nodded, tried his luck.
But he’d realized, even before the young man averted his gaze, that
all he himself wanted right now was to look at the small receding

silhouette and imagine that it belonged to someone else, another
boy, whose memory was proving persistent tonight, like that last
Porter tune, which even here, in the darkness, he couldn’t quite
dislodge from his head.
He wondered what time it was in Scottsdale, and whether the
embassy’s new phones were as good as Ms. Boyle said.